O, children, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion, its end is achieved in it, and by its expositions, and by its declarations, it is my view that you complete it with this treatise, which is part of the operation with my, that is, surgery.
Because the operation with my hand is prostrate in our region and in our time completely private, whereas many perils the science of it, and its vestiges are held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and become full of error and confusion, because their clauses are the understandings of it and the force of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you vivify that with the order of this treatise in that according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand in this our time is found, is because the art of medicine is long, and that he who acts it must before that be exercised in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia because he knows the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and he had the knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the cartilages, and the number of those, and the egress of them; and of the pulsatile veins and the quiet ones, and the places of the egress of them.
And for that reason, Hippocrates says that in a name is little, but in the work much, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not acquainted with what we have said of anatomy, it is not evacuated that he does not fall into error by which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that science and their experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed, and the woman died between her hands.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that a stone from a man who had processed in his state be swallowed, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that by the size of the stone and by the disposition of the patient, I knew on him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a black peasant who was broken in his hip; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And he about the dissolved according to his desires, and he about the relieved, and he about the left for some days and commanded that we dissolve the ligament; and it was thus that the hip and the leg became infected, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I appeased him to untie the ligament, and having obtained tranquility and thus he was freed from his pains.
But however, already corruption was confirmed in the member, for that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated after some days, until the malignancy of it was magnified upon its lord.
The cause of which is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humor, so that it should not come to it with iron at all, but that it be in a member that suffers that from all it be held hostage.
And therefore, children, it is necessary to you that the operation with the hand be devised in two divisions: that is, in operation to which health is associated, and in work with which peril is in the major dispositions.
And I have already exerted that in every place of this book in which I come operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary to you that you guard that and leave that, so that the foolish do not attain a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your arms with solicitude and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and laudable succession, and leave the diseases terrible of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more is remaining to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia already says in some of his admonitions: “Do not meddle with bad disease, so that bad physicians are not called by name”.
And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head enters feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered of the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered of the head enters feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its consequences, and in what completion it should be prohibited cautery.
Therefore I say that the discourse of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its consequences is a long and prolix discourse, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already of it has spoken a great multitude of wise men, and of it they have disagreed, and to me it suffices a little of the discourses of theirs, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery conforms to every condition universally, which is in matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the tail its matter.
In the condition tail and dry in matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to that, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient is that illness tail and dry with that which is caut and dry be healed.
And say that one who says the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all illness tail and dry that comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the condition of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the discourse of that, that experience that has already to me some times discovered.
May, however, no come upon that which is already explored and exercised in the chapter of cautery by the previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the condition of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
May in the other conditions, there is no fear upon you, and more in the illnesses cold and humid, because already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and do not disagree in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and not to the other member attached to it, except for a small consequence.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are farther from it, and often makes them come in the member illness of difficult healing and often worse.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do that except to superfluity. And it is already to us known by experiment and by length of service of study in the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused from the length of the discourse, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this pause to you secret hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and of its expulsion by which expels the illnesses, with a philosophical discourse demonstrative, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because that the consequence for the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is thrown, and more so if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than a small consequence entering for the time.
And so do not catch in your minds, or sons, that this is not esteemed but the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, so is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not thus as they take care of that, because cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the condition and dries the humidities which are cause for that pains come.
But however, cautery superflues upon medicine by the volition of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at any hour of time, according to the condition of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and that which has reached it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those; unless that the illness in which cautery is administered is illness subtle in member of few superfluities and humidities, as well as cautery of tooth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but rather it is done in small.
And most commonly spoken is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a truer saying, not that I understand it in it, because I believe that it is a cure that does not benefit with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause man administers cautery, and it benefits to that. And therefore, from here, it is clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which understand the common people and many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen this and have found that it does not do this except in some bodies, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roar of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust it on fire, the gold melts with the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more precisely to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that later the one asking for it knows what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to the humidity and coldness on the nerve, the accident of which are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the cheeks and ears it flows, and multitude of sleeping, and pain of teeth and of the throat, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that you require the virtue of the illness and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then do that seating between your hands on a lowered bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his heels. But however, as the tip of your hand has reached the place, sign that place with a tenta, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that on the place signed with a tenta, in the manner that descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of grains of ears, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until that which I have told you is seen of the bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And they said some of them that the  codina be cauterized into the bone, and be kept the cautery until some part of the appearance of the bone be burned.
And then be rashed that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
And they said others that with the cautery reach the end, until it presses in the bone forcefully until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate from that place expire the vapors of the head.
And be kept the plague open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to their way of fear; and leave that, of me, better is with health, when it is; because the head is healed by the solution of continuity of it as well as we have testified in the other members, and most of all when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more saved and better of me; and from that I use and with that work with health.
Second Chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use poultices and compresses and capipurgatives and plasters and guats and cadels and guanine and semblances, and mostly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which they recount and does not benefit them in any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not soft and finds a very great heat, then cauterize it with another cautery besides that one a little. And then cauterize that on the horn of their head with a cautery while the codena is parted. Incise the codena and uncover the quantity which we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head in the location which is called vas, — and that is the location in which a ventouse is placed. And alleviate your hand in doing so, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this finds much greater pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput with the cautery which is more subtle than that with which the middle location of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of the non-ancient migraine.
When pain suddenly occurs in the part of the head, or pain is spread into the eye, it should be evacuated with medicines that modify the head, and another cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the illnesses; and if nothing benefits, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape that and break the extremities of it from both ends. And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a lancet, while it is in it, a place is made below the codena, while it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopper for descent constriction, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then untie the and take out the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over it a poultice submerged in broth while the location makes a crust.
And then cure that with an enema while it is healing.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this manner:  ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clavilhs cautery, because the head of it is as the shape of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle location of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the location of the pain, and keep your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it which is burned by the sharpness of the codena as much as the majority of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery which is below is not burned, so that no flow of blood comes.
And then imbibe a poultice in salt water and place that over the location, and leave that for three days; and then place a poultice mashed with broth, and then cure with an enema while it is healing.
And if you wish, cauterize with the extremity of the cutellar cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this migraine properly non-ancient.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of ancient migraine.
When you cure migraine with that which we have said of the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and if nothing benefits the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not suffice to it that which we have said of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must ignite the cutellar cautery while it is white-hot, because it signifies over the location of the pain with a line of length of which it is the majority of the said, or whichever that is; and pause your hand for one moment and strengthen that while you incise the artery and it reaches into the bone.
However, it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is bad for chewing, and that the lacert is not burned and the nerve which feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is on the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery which is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and mostly to that one who ignores what is done and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the regiment of blood flow accident of the artery according to its manner, in its location of this book.
And if you see of this illness that this cautery does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healed.
And if you will, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter of artery cauterization, using a cautery with two handles, and this cauterization is better and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then apply the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
And when you point it to the ignition, and it is led around the entire ear as a wheel is revolved, or in the circuit of each time if the pain is in each. Lengthen yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear little by little as much as you feel the place with the touch.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of a tumor.
A tumor which is cured and by cauterization is nothing but of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with herbs and purgatives and remedies, and if you do not find comfort in your cure, then you must cauterize the ailment with three cauteries: the first you must at the root of the ear, the second a little from its temple, and the third you must at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, more sovereign a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the code is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is shown here. But however, more subtle is that one a little so that you see; and that handle in its place of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is shown there until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and you do not find comfort in your medication and the ailment has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle location of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the nape of the neck. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then be cured with the water that proceeds.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
Then give to the patient at the beginning large herbs and pills of the kind that modify the nerves.
And then shave the head of the patient and place on the nape of his neck a plaster of the kind described in the treatise of plasters.
And pause that some times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed, well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that proceeds.
But if you add more and the ailment is that tolerant of water, then make to him a cautery in the middle location; and if you want more addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
Then you must proceed in the modification of the head with herbs and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head, and with a cautery above all the horns of the head, and with a cautery on the rear part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the ailment of softening of the body of too much of that and the ailments tolerate and the ailment is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the lower back, and certainly with cautery until it is burned of the code of him, and elevate your hand. And then carefully treat that which is diseased, and this cauterize with olive oil.
Chapter X.
Of the cauterization of epilepsy.
Epileptics are not cauterized, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer safeguards and purgatives to the brain, modifying it beforehand for a few days, with the blessing of food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the nape of the neck, and on each corner of his head, cauterize. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with cauteries as I have said, having paralytic and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And cauterize with olive oil as previously stated.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterization subtle according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then make them drink water that purifies the brain of them according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a proper tourniquet on them above the circle, and place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient be sentient, and be held from all parts.
And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy to border with sheep's wool. And warm that on the fire for moderate heating, which the said patient suffers when it is most on them. And then put that in the middle of the head of them in the circle, and let it be infused until it is cooled.
And make this water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of them well until they are healed; or if you will, cauterize that making small points according to the most of them, unless you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a kind of cautery that moistens the brain with equality.
And then place that cauterized in wool or in  ginseng.
Chapter XII.
Of the cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that purifies the head of them, and guard that from all humidities.
And make that suffer in a bath in degu for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of the ailment of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the code; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from blood flows when it is cauterized; and if you see from them blood flows, stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the abscess of those and caution of blood flows.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the heels are old and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water seeping in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you are indigested of addition, then cauterize that in all parts of the heel on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cauterization of nose odor.
When you medicate that with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give the patient the cochies to drink for three nights; and then shave the head of them, and cauterize them with a middle cautery with olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows above the hairs a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the shape.
Chapter XV.
Of cautery for softening eyelids of the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the shape of it:
And if you, cauterize that on the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and be elongated from the temples. And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter XVI.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of them and prick the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of them so that they prick the eye, cauterize in those two manners, for cauterize or is with fire or is with medicine comburent.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of that he may see his hairs as those which they clean, until they are prolonged and equal; and if prick that you must their naisment, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it be not bad until the hairs are born.
Therefore, as they are born and equal, then pause the head of the patient in your tie, and then send over the eyelid of the eyes of him with a tenta, with a sign which be according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place a poultice immersed in a  album of  honey or in a mucilage of ptilli on the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape of it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have drawn, little by little, in several times, until the surface of the code be burned which is as a leaf of myrtle, all apparent properly.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated from the puncture of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave that for three days, and then place over it a poultice with border until the scab be eradicated. And then cure that with an enguent until it be healed.
But if it returns for the hairs any cause to their naisment and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not prick the eye.
But the cautery with medicine comburent this is that you command the patient that he may see the hairs until they are prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of sabot known and of live cause one. i., o which that, and then mix those causes well, and make that with a festinacio so that it be not frozen; and then expand of that over the cloth which is made as the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and place that over one eye or both; and place after the eye a poultice immersed in a honey, and the head of the patient be in your tie.
And place the said over the medicine and press that a little and do not the bad until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for bite is in him as of fire.
And therefore as he will perceive that the other bite, then leave the medicine and mau that with your tie; therefore as ceases the bite, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it is washed from the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if it returns over that of the medicine on the place in which it has not put the medicine and do not be degraded until it be equal your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place over it a poultice with border until the scab of the adhesion be eradicated, and then cure that with an enguent deafinicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, from your operation that you keep with pervigil diligence that in the eye does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid after some days is softened and some cause of the hairs prick in the eye, then iterate your medicine over that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then enaviro him until it be healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And the way of healing will not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head on your knee, and have someone hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the form of a reed or a vulture's feather, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it may penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, it may be brought out as it tends.
But however, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out its pus and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little distance from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery on the grain of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore, if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and enclose it with an astringent enema until it is healed.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then place on it a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped as you deem fit in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first-dayers say: enter into the location of the fistula and cut it open, and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which this is the form: And pour into it the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with a good grip, and do not move the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place it on the heel of the patient, a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because molten lead burns the location of the fistula and heals it by a miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tract from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not profit your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is described:
And it is the concavity of it according to the fineness of a needle.
And then place that init carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerot until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess develops and then breaks, and then it is ancient, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure it and the cure does not profit, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited one into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the burning iron reaches the bottom of it, and after it, do so once or twice; and then cure it with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore, if the healing is abscind and it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and it does not profit, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come near so that you place the cautery on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then take your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a worm in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterize it in one of two ways: with a cauterizing iron made of cow's hide, or with fire.
Cauterizing with hide is that you take the hide of cows and melt it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a rod and wrap it around the end of the instrument, and then immerse that in the melted hide, and place it on the painful tooth firmly while it is still hot.
And then repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a rod in the melted hide above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the iron reaches the edge of the tooth's cavity.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you wait for the handle of the iron or of the tool to be heated, and that it be in the middle of it some thickness and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizing tool, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it while the cauterizing tool is still hot; and do this several times until the pain is subdued, either on that day or the next.
And cover that with the impression of that cauterizing tool, the patient fills his mouth with good hide and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizing tool.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and humors that are cold and do not respond to digestion by medicines, and you want the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cauterizing tool whose shape is this following, having two ends open so that the smoke escapes from the cauterizing tool through the other end, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you need it, until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizing tool according to the amount of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a rod dipped in hide over it until what the fire has burned is subdued.
And then treat it with gargles and poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of a sore throat and constriction of the uvula.
When the humors come upon the throat of the lungs, and especially when this is of cold complexion, then the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that of the root of the goiter in the depressed area.
And guard yourself that you do not reach the cauterizing tool to the goiter nor burn the edge of it but a little.
And cauterize that with another cauterizing tool of the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And the cauterizing tool of it be a chisel according to the previous manner.
And then treat it with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauterizing tools on the clavicle in the depressed areas of the left and right; and with another cauterizing tool in the middle of the foot between two toes; and let the cauterizing tool be a chisel according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauterizing tool that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then treat it with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cauterizing tool have three ramps because the cauterization is done in this way: in one go you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the tic douloureux, which is the pain of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and by a small movement it is dislocated as it should, as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient be reversed on their back or on their side; and then elevate the edge which is in the back part of the cheekbone to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is dislocated to the back parts.
And then ignite the cauterizing tool having two heads; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the groin while it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be like that of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place on the cautery a piece of salt, and then make the patient adhere to the cautery, and the limb not be bad for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or with a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes a burning in the stomach and many humors that extract from its complexion and multiply rawness in it, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then it happens that the patient is on his two sides, and extends his arms and his thighs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery left foot for the quantity of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries left from the two sides of the cautery, until it comes the figure of a triangular cauterization; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that they will make a puncture.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the groin.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form addition, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach pointed to him who is afraid of this cautery; and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of cauterization of the liver.
When it happens in the liver pain for coldness or for humidity or for excessive windiness, that from its normal complexion is thrown by superfluous egress, and the patient is cured with that which we have said and not confirmed, then it happens that the patient is on his back on his neck, and feel with tension three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria, the honor according to the decubit of a man.
And be the space the one which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery much.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the width of the groin, and there is no more adjusted; and if the patient standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then be lying, the one who has already extended his thighs, and elevate his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery knife, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and be adhered the width of the whole groin so that it be adhered all the body and reach into the bowels, because the groin here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When it happens an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient is more heavy and the pain is sharpened.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is sharpened great and sometimes that already fatigue the doctors the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess with tension; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which preceded on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until the whole groin is burned, until it reaches the point, until it is healed.
And then cure it with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not let this form of cautery be used except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; but with this experiment some times be bold on this operation, but nevertheless leave that of us, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristolochia to pleurisy burn according to this manner to be done, and it is that you take of the roots of aristolochia long dry a root long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and put it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries, I have guided, one slightly leaning towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is leaning between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, leaning slightly towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries from the back parts; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And no cove that you understand your hand with the cautery, but rather be in the manifest of the code in work.
And already said some ancients that some of the men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and be cured, so as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because he quickly happens in the fistula place to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are right, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not understand your hand with the cautery; and the patient be raised on his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticles, the which cause we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight of the spleen the one that reaches the bed of the left patient.
And be your elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the width of the body.
And then introduce the two verticles, ignite it, in that entrance where with those you penetrate the code from the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and therefore are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three verticles.
And then you cure the cautery as if it had been laid aside for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of cauterization of hydropics.
Cauterize not cats in hydropics but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the spirit of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid aside for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with that which it is necessary so that two understandings be added to it, and it be festinated to it with assistant healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be clavilh according to the form of which is used before, and it is the one with which the back is cauterized be olivar according to what is precedent to its form.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropics and are full of watery pus, it is necessary that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati, that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the watery pus remains.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh be made cautery with the cutting edge of the cautery. And be the cautery according to the length of the thigh: and one below and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the plague open after the cure for a long time so that no water remains from it.
And therefore take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterizing the belly.
When the belly is due to heat and humidity that inflames the viscera, so is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and this is cured by the ways of healing and not by conferring, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus subtle, with a subtle cautery; and with cautery on the skin above the navel large, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors abound and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize this on the intestines and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure of benefit of which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterizing old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors, heat or corrupted humors, and are cured by what we have said in the division and not by conferring your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spondilh of the small and small triangular, and with cautery above the navel cays for two digits.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him is inflamed and the food of him is not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize this on the stomach with a large cautery according to what is preceded; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterizing a boil near its abscess.
When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to the ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that abscess boil, and last your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then take care of them with what you confer to them of the enguentz until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterizing fistulas that are made in the nature of the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recounted in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the nature of the old, and it is corrupted by pus and corrupted humors, and therefore that which is most worthy of cove is that you probe it with a subtle one, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the probe.
And iterate over that cautery until those corrupted parts are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning of nerves and of veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the bowels, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not of it removed, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it corrupted, or do this from those causes of which will come a remembrance in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterizing the boils.
When in the boils it is necessary pain by heat or by gross ventilation, and by this the patient's flesh is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize this over the boils with a cautery over each boil with a cautery clavilh of which I have previously recounted the remembrance.
And firmly you cauterize with the second one a little, so that there will come three cauteries linear, and then they will be more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterizing the bladder.
When accidents occur in the bladder weakness and softening by heat and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize this in the part below the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the pubic bone, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
And the length of each cautery shall be according to the quantity of the knots of the feet; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be shaped according to what is being processed.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the  womb.
When moisture and humidity come into the womb, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the inducement of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the  bearing of them, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be shaped like a key.
Chapter .xl.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are poured into the part of the hip, and they are caused by the swelling of their place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in that which is below.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a cautery in a circle shape, because you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery of which preceded the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole hip; and take care of that while it is healing.
Chapter .xli.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the hip, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, therefore, when you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the part of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And the spaces which is between each cautery is the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
But some times it is the cautery on the middle part above the head of the hip for that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the shape was preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is, a circle containing and burning the thickness of the whole hip.
And this is the manner of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the place where you feel the pain; and with one cautery on the  hip for four fingers a little below the bony part.
And if the cautery is a knife, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the hip.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends into the place near the toes, then cauterize that here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.
And if the patient feels pain below the hip in the thigh, then cauterize that here with a knife cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery as long as you burn nerves or great arteries, and that by that to you is on the patient no harm or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and ended in the cauterization, and the leg inflamed until the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted the whole foot. And then comes a strong solution of the belly, and by that death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise men said in the cauterization of the hip the cautery of which this is the manner: make it resembling a circle of iron of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be the depth of it according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And within that circle be another third; and be the spaces which is between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and be those circles open on two parts; and be the length of those cauls a knot or two knots, and make in those marks of iron decently fitted in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three red-hot cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: or, children, of this kind of cautery, we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
May the cauteries to him who suffers them, and may it be found in that place of him.
May cauteries with medicinal ointments be that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they put the handle of the iron door; let the length of the sides in the navy of them be two walnuts or as those.
And if the spaces which are between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they be open below and above, and they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place upon the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand upon the area of the back; and then take some hot water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — for that bite is so as of fire — until the bite ceases.
And then elevate your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all the back with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and place upon that a poultice until the blackness of the adhesion is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it a pus; this is called in healing.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make for him a statue in it that contains water according to how it is made in the back in the same way.
And this is the manner of hot water, and you have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of caustic in the extinguished of both one part one, and thrice them and place in a new pot of which the bottom part be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
And place below the bottom of the pot another pot inverted, and pour over that alkali and caustic living water of cool water which covers those for a finger, and as soon as you compress those with your hand for good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it water sharp in the bottom to the inverted pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living caustic and another alkali renewed, for that one then becomes of strong force sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation makes of fire.
And so of medicines some with which it is cauterized much, as tezizic and honey anacrat and caustic in sabon so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which the pain of the back and sciatica is cured, and magnifies much well being of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed in one time as it is recounted, for strong he that intertwine in bath and eysic already knows of that.
And it is that it be taken of green celery, and if it is not found green, be taken fig fresh; and much be thrice it with a little of gray and be placed upon the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be tied.
And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cession of the adhesion.
And then put that in a bath and then when the body of him be red, introduce that into the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cauteries with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with the skin of a goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it will benefit him very well; and let the cautery be with him according to this manner: take wool and be it soaked in old oil, and be placed between the toes of the foot and between the heels.
And then take dried goat skin and inflame that with fire until it is made charcoal; and place it upon the wool and leave it until it is extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the bite reaches into the back and relieves the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of two.
Sometimes pain is in the two for many causes, such as by striking or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, and for causes like those, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cauterize only this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar ones, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the patient, because you have to cauterize each line with a cautery, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial chisel cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Often this disease befalls the young children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that they accidentially strike upon their structure in the leg, causing elevation and movement.
And atrophy in the last vertebra of the spine and its knots that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this form: Which presses the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after curing the area as we have said.
But be careful that cauterization is not administered in gout that is made by spasm of a nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, as gout caused by cold is cured with the method of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the ankles or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that over each pain with three or four cauteries of the whole part with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery beforehand, be only around the circumference of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the ankle of the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the feet and it is called suagra, then prick in the circuit of the heels as it turns, prick in those two lines.
And if there remain pains in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the heels over each knot and over the palm of the hand.
And if the pains rise to the joints at the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize those of the whole part of the armpits.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and flaccid it is evacuated with this cautery, may God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the angles and saying the intestines before the hernia, and this begins to approach, then it is as if you command the patient to leave his food on his day and that he uses of lenient causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
And after following the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to have his leg inside so that it is cast or the hernia appears.
And after returning that with your fingers and feeling the fracture over the bones of the pelvis with a sign of the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And after ignites the cautery of which this is the form of it:
So that it is very hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after pausing the cautery over that sign with your hand with the cautery standing straight, and you that inside that with it you can get the bones of the pelvis inside the middle of the wound; and repeat with that another time if to you that one has not achieved in the first time inside the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that it does not come to death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bone, do not interfere with your operation.
And know that the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And after the cautery, care for the area for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And after, care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the plague are sealed.
And know that you should pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his healing, the one who stretches his belly, and that the intestine does not come out from the effort of healing.
And after, when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer him decent nourishment, and keep him that way for another forty days.
And be careful of work and repletion of food and drink, and of violent voice, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you should say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and if you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and that which is exhumed from the codena as well as the third part of it; and after, cure that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first say that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
And it is placed a line that goes by the latitude in the part which is most superior of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not come to a cure with medicines, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and its smallness, and its virtue and weakness, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for by custom of those pains is that they are pointed of member to that member which approaches to it, so that know that you should cauterize those until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times is cauterized with great benefit, and more so if the kind of leprosy is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and that cured with what we have said in the division and no of it, and it is, and you fear that the corruption comprehends the whole body of it and the whole composition of it, then cauterize that on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second further below it, and the front to the end of the hair; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape of the neck or service.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little while before it impresses on the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are displaced, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already expanded on the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize that with those cauteries the ones we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the toes of their feet; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their palms.
And guard yourself from the nerves which are on the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the palate and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust cauteries, so much is it more beneficial and more convenient; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as they have the ones, because for that the body of it is already stupefied.
And know that the cauteries should be great or few according to the members and the joints according to what is preceded of the kinds of the instruments.
And then carefully apply the cautery with a mixture of flour, honey, and the other cure until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When any limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the depth of the flesh a little. And then carefully treat it with an enema until it heals.
And sometimes stupor is cauterized which arises from the spine and feet, and the vertebrae of the lower back and the place where the nerves leave which move that limb, and the stupor is removed.
May no presume about this but rather he who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the egress of the nerves of the whole moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a cautery preheated a little, according to the amount of the depth of the flesh, until it is removed and the whiteness and color of it are changed.
And then treat it with a mixture of flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of a dove or the blood of a round, each one part and all mixed together, and then apply a cloth and place it on the spot until it heals.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of cancer.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
And some wise people say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle location; but to me this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more right that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with moving cauteries.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is because of the superfluity of the matter, or because of the age of the patient, who is old or decrepit, of little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small moving cauteries, and then let it be as it hastens in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place it in the middle location of the abscess until it penetrates the flesh.
And if the cautery in that location that is farthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then treat it until it heals.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of corrodent.
Corrodent is a corruption that walks in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a location that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that location where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize it from all parts until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized locations a cloth soaked in oil mixed together until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over what is rotten in the corrupted locations.
And corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, because that is placed in the place of cauterization. But however, cauterization with fire is of more light help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of warts and of other similar things.
Many times there is a malady that is called a wart in the lower parts of the foot, and it is a hard, protruding thing, which bothers the foot; and cauterization in those is done in two ways, either by cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery concave resembling the claw of a vulture, which is made of iron according to the size which contains the wart from all parts, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited one on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And let him rest for three days before he begins to wear a bracer. And apply a poultice made with wild mallows pounded with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And treat the area with a wash of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times it happens in the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then when you administer cauteries with water, take a small nozzle of brass or iron or vulture's bone, and place it over the boil; and pour a little quantity of water into the nozzle, and hold your hand, and you turn it with the compression of your hand all around, and press the edge of the nozzle into the root of the boil, and the water will be drawn in the way to the root of the boil; and wait for the patient a little the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove it, because the boil with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do with those and the other until you come upon all of them in the body.
And treat those pus that the roots of the boils are eradicated with this wash which the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to fire in the nerve or due to fever of a fiery cause, or due to another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with an olive cautery.
And the tremor of him is rested and hastened the healing of the fiery illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
When on the body are spots white, and are pustules split which are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, that it be cauterized over all head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lens cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and if they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, they do those, and it heals of those.
But however, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of blood flow accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a flow of artery that is incised, the wound which must be closed, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you tie with your hand to the orifice of the artery, and place upon it your finger, and press that many times until it stops the flow of blood from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number many, and exhale over them while they are burning.
And take of those one small or one large according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein hastily put that you have removed your finger, and put the cautery until it is burned and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery well heated of the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another evil.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or with cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are more burned and the blood is restricted, or that it is tied with a cord or with a ligature for strong structure, or that medicines are placed upon it of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and they are strengthened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But that one who administers decent restriction of him with a ligature and with structure with cloths or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer but briefly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the wound, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more sew in which it has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incision and perforation and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and their like.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the use of a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine comburent, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those with the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters of the subordination of the head within the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who wants to know this may be helped, about what he has asked.
And before that I begin this, know, my son, that in this chapter is terror that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that, know that there must be great caution in it, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times catgut evacuation occurs, which is with blood, with which the life of the body is sustained, the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the ulcer or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the hands of those, death itself.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that in which you are situated, for sometimes cases of diseases must be handled with many manners. And of those, some will go with their illness and it is lighter for them death, and thus by the vehemence of what they find of their illness, and by the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his trust and said, you hoping with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, know that you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause about this except with certain knowledge which verifies this to you, and to which by following, a praiseworthy success.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them, to which health is converted, for in that is to you an assistant upon acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, God in you breathe his understanding and no obstacle to your direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you that which you have asked for and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water which is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this illness often happens to children from the moment of birth and when the midwife tightens the child's head, its vitality.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death followed, and thus it is to me the work laid bare in those.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not go over himself for the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased so that fire died.
And this humidity or is added between the bone and the bone, or is added after the bone upon the skull.
For the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is few, then know that you must do in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure two nights so that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is greater, then are here two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is after the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts and it is not that to you hidden. Know that you must do in the middle place of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision extract all the humidity; and after strengthen the fissures with cloths and feathers; and after embroca that with wine and oil into the fifth day, and after untie the bandage and care the wound with tents and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which considers to open the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the repletion of the water, and do this according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and it becomes fluid with blood and dies the patient by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the hands or feet, and it is old and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the last cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries, the patient raises his head, and you rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and you tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider where the vein is; and the places of each one above the places which are near the ears are depressed, and they are hidden unless in some men.
And then press upon the artery with a tent, and then incise each one with the spatula of each one part sharp with incision reaching into the bone, and that is by the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions at the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is about two fingers, because when any vein is incised, the blood is emitted with pulsatile egress, which jumps out for a frequent jump.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and then press with a tent, and finish into the bone.
And this that you must get rid of the blood is the quantity of a wine ounce. And do not get more or less than this, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the cephalic, then incise it so that it does not become a suppurating caut.
And then strengthen the wound with pads and bandages of cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain old or acute catarrh occurs, due to humidity of the air and by the quality in the lacerations of the temples, or an old and vehement sore similar to those, and it is medicated with the ways of cure of medicine and it does not respond, then we have resorted to these illnesses the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hair that is in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by the vehemence of the flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient is tightened with some cloth; and then rub the area with rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the bone with that with facility until you reach the artery; and then insert it into it and extract that at the sovereign parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then wrap that with the extremity of the onion, and then incise that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not bring a flux of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood of all.
And then evacuate the blood of a wine ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong cord or with long ropes, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and it will become a flux of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this either at that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cautery cutellar until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in the place of that same work.
And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of a complete hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover after the extraction of the arteries that you have placed the area of the incision, and that they be placed on it powders decently made, and then cure it with dry medicines making the flesh to arise and with poultices until it is healed.
And if while you are working another vein becomes a flux of blood from the artery, then you must take care to restrain that blood, either with a cautery, or what you fill the area of the incision, and tighten your hand until the blood is restrained. And if for any of those causes it is not present to you, then pause your finger on the area until the blood is coagulated, and pour the area with water of vehement coldness until the acuity rests, and tighten according to what you must.
And that which is lighter in extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and after a pause, a little, until they reach the bone and divide the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated completely with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is at the same time. But however, if it is less sharpness than two handles is better, because if it is sharp with two handles it approaches each burn, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is slightly cut.
And this work is better in all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the cure of bodies of acute and sour rheums of the heels.
When the rheums are sour, and the bodies of those veins which are on the test of the head are inflamed, and do not offer in that any cause of medicinal cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in their forehead a walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid in such a way that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed sour in the cure of these, and numbered that cure with spassa.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on their forehead, and then cut three incisions in the forehead equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one incision be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if to you a piece of sponge apparelled or dried cloths most with which you dry the blood.
And then introduce the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the division of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the ciphrac which is on the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then straz this spatula and introduce into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp of the flesh annexed of the flesh, and the side of it lean inside the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then do that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs of the blood quantity equal, express the places of the pieces of the congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure a calgua of old cloth, and pause over those powders embedded in wine and oil and sweet wine, and vegas that they do not become pus caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of bazilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of rheums by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts inside of the head.
When there comes a catartz acute and continuous, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted little, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the front of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from few veins of the parts inside proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then cut in that one fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and elongate your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are maught of the mastication), until it be the bone discovered.
Dry all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then repleys between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with cloths of linen. And then strengthen above with powders embedded in wine and oil so that it do not become pus caut.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound as it begins to grow flesh, and then take care of it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a poultice of them and administer it on these sores at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catches in the ears.
Every cause that catches in the ears is one of four species, or it is mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and lead, or it is of plant, such as quince or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likeness, or some beast.
And therefore when stone catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and you put the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient snort with a condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of snorting. And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides, for many times it is cured with these causes.
And if it is not cured, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called a subtle epicyclic gesti, of which this is the form:
And if it is cured with gesti, well is it; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of brass and insert the extremity of the cannula into the canal of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except the cannula. And then extract with your wind with strong attraction, for many times as with water that we have recounted.
But if it is not cured in this manner, then take of halka lit or of vetch apparelled with which birds are taken a small quantity, and place that at the extremity of a ray, and then envelop over that properly placed. And then insert that into the canal of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And therefore if it is not cured with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should cut it out before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting it out is that you at the beginning lance the patient's vein cephalic and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make that cezer between your hands and turn the ear to the sides, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear above the grey of it in the place well pressed of it. And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches the stone, and, the stone being reached, remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the catching cause in the ear is one of the greases that grow and swell, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice, then you take a subtle teune spatum according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that grease which is caught in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and prop extract them with the oncis or with a subtle gesti, or with incision as we have said, for the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover the patient with a condiment to sneeze at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if it is cured by this, well is it; and if not, then take many small stones and lions according to the length of the finger, and calcine those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the canal of his ear and jumps on one foot of that side and percusses with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is cured.
Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is cured. And already the water is cured so that you take paper or of g.i., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned the most of it.
And then put another g.i. and do this as many times until all the water is cured, and straz it with a cannula as we have said of the stone extractor.
But in the extract of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as it is and similar to it, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes to appear in the sense of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is lighter of all the other causes that catch in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you must watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if there is any cause of the worms here, then extract them with a probe or with subtle ones, but if there is no cause, then take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wider at the top, of which this is the shape. And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey in this way, then plug and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And it is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape. And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, and with a flat top.
And therefore it is as if it were pushing into the cavity of the tube of which here it is necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it in the extremity of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the tube—and that is in the ear—and then introduce the reed with cotton underneath and express it with your hand with temperate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear should already be scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate it.
Chapter .vii.
Of the cure of earwax.
Sometimes, certain children are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this happens to some men, earwax in the ear canal due to a plague or flesh nothing in that; and this earwax sometimes happens in the part of the ear canal that does not reach the ear, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And the one that happens in the part of it that does not reach the ear is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in the one in which you reach the ear, then you must place the patient's ear in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see earwax appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
If the extremity of it, in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the earwax is due to flesh born in the ear or in the canal of it, then you with those subtle ones and cut that vehemently easily until it is removed all the flesh.
And if the earwax is in the part of the ear canal, then take a subtle reed long and scald that with fire a little, and then put that into the ear canal.
And therefore if you have felt earwax with that which the patient finds with ease, by gravity of the ear, exert the oppression of it with ease; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some and put that in water and pulverize it over it, following the three times, and use it; and if you see the ear already be festered, then you must extract the one and replace it with another one which you have wrapped in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the pus cauterizes; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there happens a flow of blood, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use of the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure of athezil which happens to the eyelids.
Athezil which happens to the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is humid, sometimes dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with a needle, and you cut them with a spatula from their roots, and then place over the places three times.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is to the incisions and frequent times return when there is any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Treatment of great swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Veins become inflamed in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause which is assembled to swelling in its strength and hardness, and by its size it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider it, when the swelling is coming from within, that which is outside the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, cut on that with a fissure along the width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it evacuates, and then suspend that with an onion and cut away that.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with suture; and cure that while it is healing.
And if it is little, to you it will not come to harm for that, because the ointment of it restores that and mends it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, then you evacuate the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an onion, another that you do not dig into incision, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, that you do not notice in any cause.
And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the place with water that mends while it is healing.
Chapter .x.
Of the cure of the above eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath is gray which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accides to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun for that reason because tears get to those.
And because of that, they often rub those on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of those below the eyebrows are humid, the ones that already have covered inflammation, and imminent appearance of cataract is in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel cataract within those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places his head in your, and then places cloth on him and makes a poultice, and makes of it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then places that on that and presses with your fingers from all sides so that it is aggregated arcernach in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision with fissure along the width, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in flaubotomia.
But in the preon cove that you make the cut entirely while you reach arcernach, because in the most favorable processes arcernach is processed by fissure according to the form of grayseza blanca.
Therefore, extract that with cloths the ones that you have enveloped between your fingers to the outer parts and revolve between your right and left hand while it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure for that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and you damage that.
But if no appears to you arternach at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease while it processes arternach; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and wine and place them on the place and strengthen those with powders.
And so some that grind salt and place that in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remade of that humidity.
And then cure that while it is healing.
But if it happens in the place abscess caut, then cure that with plasters cedatils while it is healing.
Chapter .xi.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are born from the adjusted lower ones and those are antiquated, then those touch the eye and make become manners of maladies as such as continuous tears and softening of eyelids and film while that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye, and cure is in four manners: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to that which was said before in the chapter of cautery; or it is made tactini by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I say.
And therefore cove that you place the head of the patient in your, then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good is; and if no, introduce needle in that in which it is faithful of the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with faithful below, and that be — near the margin of the eyelid in which naysso the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the faithful to the parts below with the eyelid, and convert that with the ray.
And then make in the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with spatula incision from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the faithful and place below the eyelid small powders of cotto or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with tent, and be as such as figure of leaf of myrtle.
But however the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because of those who are the ones who indicate that it should be incised of the eyelid a large amount according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then bring the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as much as the thickness of the king.
And then put the ointment in one of the two angles of the wound, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the suture the two lips with a thread or a fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere that which is superfluous of the threads above the eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you want, leave the plaque with its suture, and take care of it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated, it deserves the sealing of the plaque and the addition of it; but suture is better, and therefore, I say so, as the ancients did to tax.
But however, there should be solicitude about the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another way to taxmir, and it is that you shape on the eyelid as a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate and gathered hooks according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do this, have the hooks, and this is not equal, then take a needle in which there is thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between those two threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole wound on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs from your incision or your fissure, then treat that abscess with cerot and its likeness, and with ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid that its hairs are converted, therefore, it is necessary to use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some cases is more artificial.
To taxmir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is indented according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which length be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them be less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each of the parts, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety above what is superfluous of the eyelid of the wheel, and constrict the canes of each of the parts with strong constriction, and leave it for some days, because the wound by the constriction will die and be denied and will be able to enter until by itself it falls.
But if it is late, then break it with the tweezers, and then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of stinging hairs in the wheel with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, and prickly in the wheels, then the operation in it is that you take a fine needle and put in it a fine thread of cedar and lion, and then you adjust the extremities of it and no matter in a very subtle way. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another fine thread below it in a short way, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate the eyelid carefully until you extract that from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from below and insert it into the alixati, and be the hairs one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that so that the hair be removed with alixati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the alixati is thrown and the hair is not removed, you will throw the alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with it, until it is thrown alixati from the upper part.
And watch that with the vision of the wheel, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and close somewhat and close the wheel, and leave the closures for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and is born over it good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is raised with that, or that you let it enter so that it is elongated towards some space, and then you raise that.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the eyelid above.
When it comes in the pupil and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, or on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of plague or incision or cautery, and it is called leporine, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or incisions or cautery, or by things similar to their bad curing.
The way of the operation in it is that you break that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and you tie those together while they are healing.
And do not cover that you use of cure of it from the causes which dry it, constricting; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than at no time you had it.
Use in that of causes that soften it as is fennel, and embroil with the water in which are cooked lentil and its seeds, or a decoction of diaquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in it, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what you had before.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly named cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plague or by incision or by cautery or by other things similar.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and you put that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incision with a wide spatula. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid as it should, good is; and if not, take the ray and put that in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and be of their made angle until when they meet be made figure of theirs.
And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
And then place the flesh that for the amount that is the side of it acute below of it, that which seizes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the wool thread; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and the poultices until it is healed.
And if cataract must be by fissure or suture or cautery, then you must do it with a flat fissure on the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that it run in it operation, according to what is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in each manner which is possible to it until it makes return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to what it convieneys of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is more above with the album of the eye, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, then you must between the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate that up, or extend that with the unci.
And then you incision the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which not be with the sharpness of the incisions, having obtuse a little so that the patient not be disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not touch the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision which excoriate that adhesion with ease until it be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of linen, and put on the eye wool infused in egg white, and then the third day use of consolidative causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, whether it is nervous, and it is like a hard, thin, cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white, congealed moisture, which when you touch it, it is forced to take on a point, it is cut off, and the point is not put in its place.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, inward, as it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient puts his head in the tieu, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a point of little duplication and extends it to the upper parts. And then he takes a needle and introduces into it a piece of horse, or cow, or sheep, or similar, or strong thread, or doubles the tip of the needle little by little and puts it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates it with the needle, and ties the nail with thread; and extends it to the upper parts, and excoriates with the thread the edge of the nail, which seizes the pupil. And thus you follow that with the thread into the back of it.
And then you incise the remainder in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the lacrimal natural so that by incision of it, there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with the sole thread extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a lion's spatula, of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that there is rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
And then the incision is put in the eye a little salt trice or a drop of cef made of cinnamon, and leave it in for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put in it the thread, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recount in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula, acute according to this form: With subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and is confused and put in that root, then distill of your own hour in the eye a drop of cef made of cinnamon or with cef rog or with salt trice, and close the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess may be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great harm, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that it does not incise the flow of tears.
And then distill into the lacrimal cef rog and made of cinnamon until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of the chalazion and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh is born red, and it is over-placed so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts before and it is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient puts his head in the tieu; and then opens the eyes of that one and collects all that flesh with convenient threads to water, and take it with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself of the eye that you do not damage it with the course of your operation.
And be your incision with the one with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which it is collected as it will come the form of it near this chapter.
Therefore, as it is completed your incision and is removed all that flesh, then fill the eye with salt trice, or distill into it powder red and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye before a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of chalazion and it is lordly blood caut, and you fear abscess caut, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that yields that abscess, and then repeat over that with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which accides in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye is from the natural way or from the accidental way, work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter xviii.
Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus flows from the veins which are located on the wound and prohibit the clothing from its operation, and the wound is opened for a long time.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which is pus is strong and in it there is no other illness besides pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a sponge or with two, according to your prudence; and let that sponge be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two sponges gradually in one body according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, while those veins are being remade from the wound and are being turned back.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the wound with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut into but those veins.
And when you will have finished, then you distill into the wound chief green or red, so that with its sharpness it corrodes that which is remade from the pus.
But if that is not possible for you, collect everything in that hour, and then you plaster everything with that which gives relief from the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is calmed and it is assured of the cauterized abscess.
And then repeat over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter xix.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with acute medicine according to what is preceded by the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it but that you make over the abscess, you must consider its maturity, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is uncovered the bone.
And therefore, when it is uncovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you remove it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named of sharp head, and it is made of iron, and it is the head rounded as to grasp it which is made pointed by the filing or by the sharpening with a subtle file (as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And this is done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and in it is born good flesh and is abscind the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not abscesses and you do not meet in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not engendered in it but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or with acute medicine, and as soon as the bone is uncovered, then you take a tribe according to this form:
Let the extremity of the iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be gradually thinned to the extremity as often as it is.
And then pause that over the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as much as it finds air coming out when you move your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore, as the flesh grows and the place is hardened, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter on the patient.
Chapter xx.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
When the wound eminates with its totality and does not meet with any harmful or diminishing in the clothing, then cover that you relax the patient, and then you follow it, and then you pause breezy in the neck its scarification and suck for good suction; and then pause over the wound liniment which is made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the wound with soft powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of the lions soft, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those soft.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need. And then strengthen over those with hard cloth with strong structure; and iterate the blisters with suction its scarification; and then remove the blisters and leave the wound straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then cover that it be very tight.
And then remove the ligament in the day and night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already be reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the stricture and the leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a grain of rasim, and the form of man is seen by this, and you want to cut it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the side below to the side above, and then put the other needle, which has a double thread, on the side of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
And then extract the needle and place it on the wound infused in the album of the egg and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, add a whole circle of cloth around the wound, adjusting the eminence, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes to the bottom of the wound, and let the albuminous moisture run, and descend the wound and enter quickly.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This disease that is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wound, resembling a descent of water, and it is not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient lie on the saddle arranged and straight, and then take his head in your hands of two parts and move it so that you see the swelling coming to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as if he saw.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared the descent of the swelling with the water that we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and end it on the panniculus, carefully separating the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the place where it is hollow), until the swelling is brought out.
Therefore, when it is brought out, then you distill into the wound water boiled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water from the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which it is convenient to pierce with a sermo, declaring, then that according to the health.
Then you must make the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and tie his wound, making it tight.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound, if the wound in which is the water is the left; or on your right hand, if the wound is the right.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the end of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the side of the lower lacrimal, and then press the almond with virtue and revolve your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already reached the hollow cause.
And you must make the measure of the path of the almond to the bottom be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends quickly, then vetz the patient water over which he sees his vision soon, and the almond in his wound.
And then rest for a while; therefore if the water has descended, then you rest that other time until the almond is thrown.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and revolve it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound carefully; and then place outside the wound a cotton or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg albumen and lick the wound with water.
But now in those who are of our times place on that comi trissat with egg albumen.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness—for it is in some men whose wound is hard a lot—then you must take the spatula which is called alberid, of which this is the form:
And therefore pierce with that that conjunction, and do not end your hand in the trace, and it is not unless you make a way for the almond to the subtle place.
And then introduce the almond as we have said.
And you must complete the work, prepare the patient to sleep comfortably in a dark room, where they lie on their back and are prohibited from all movement.
And keep him in nature so that his nature may be cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
And then unbind him in that dark room and expose him to the fresh air, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not let him do this at the hour of cures or shortly after the infusion. You must, however, let him do this because the water can easily be drawn out with great and vehement regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the bandage before the seventh day, and rectify it with the water that yields the abscess.
Then you unbind his sight and place a cloth on his face so that his breath is regulated, leaving him in the dark room for several days.
And then he should be taken out of that room gradually and conversed with about his causes.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not excused from vision some times, and then you should be bold about the operation.
And we have already arrived at some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which the water is drawn.
But however, I have not seen in our land anyone who has perfected water, nor have I read about it in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be on those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or properly of iron, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as it is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are born various flesh growths, some of which are a cause that is assembled like a scorpion's tail, or a polyp; and this disease is called a polyp because it resembles that tail represented. And of this, the flesh is cancerous, pale, of a dark color; and of this, the flesh is lion-like, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient lie between your hands and placed in the sun, and  dry his nostrils, and gently pick at those flesh. And then extract that to the foreparts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed; that if any cause remains of which the abscission is possible, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains of it. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him what you must; or if it is of malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize it until it is abscised and the cavities are all removed.
And then put in the nose after the incision, a mixture of wine and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that deep within it is flesh wound in the pus that remains in the bones of the nose to which the abscission has not reached.
Therefore, then you must introduce a thread of linen into which there is some thickness, and weave in it some threads of wool, and place between each thread the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
And after that this has been done, that it may attract its odor until it reaches the canals of the nose, and be placed upon his throat, because often times children in schools do this action, and it is easier for him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that emerges above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the wool that is in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already among the wool of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
But if you need a cure that requires it, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small conch, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a pipe, and the tube of the instrument to purge, make it flat, uncovered; to which have a handle at the back of it, with which you have that when you heat it in oil or water that you wish of the suckable juices and causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the ailments in the extremities of the nose.
Many ailments are felt in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and attended to on certain days in which it is not possible to look at it.
And for that reason, you should notice that at the beginning of its appearance, and record all of that. And then place on the location a cautery or medicine that burns, the one that was in its place.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is hardened, dry, of a dark color, and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron, for it is a dangerous abscess; for many times, to those who incise this abscess, a great evil befalls the one who had it.
And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of a dark color, and sometimes that incision is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and cure the location with water that is warm and compresses until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suturing of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by likenesses.
Know that when an accident occurs, a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little confidence is given in that operation, except in some men.
Therefore, when it becomes necessary for someone to have any of these causes, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and then cure it until it is healed.
And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then you should scrape each part of its edge until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over those, pulverize dragon's blood and incense, and place over the powder a piece of diaphaniacon plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it bound for two days or three, and then untie it and change that plaster and leave it until the fibers are themselves separated, and then cure with gargles until it is healed.
But the manner of the suturing is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the dissolution of continuity with thread as you have been taught.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts between them.
Many times, it becomes necessary for many men in the parts between their lips, some abscesses hard like the fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, when it becomes necessary for you to convert the lips and split each of those hardnesses from every part, and then incise the abscess, fill the location with incense until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the location with water that is styptic, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly often there are on the gums, flesh adjusted, which the ancients called albulus, therefore, when it becomes necessary for you to suspend that with forceps or that which you have with the pliers and incise that, you must let its root, and let the blood run.
And then place on the location incense or other styptic or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts between them and of the front and between the gums, there are rough, sharp, and sometimes black scabs, and they are made yellow or green as the gum, due to this corruption, and the teeth become rough.
And therefore, when it becomes necessary for you to make the patient between your hands and place the head of him in your lap, and scrape the teeth in which those scabs and causes appear like sand until none of their cause remains, and this do of the blackness and the yellowness and the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if it is last that which is in those of the beginning of the root, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the root over those on the other day and the second and the third until it comes to the final state in what you wish.
And know that teeth have need of various forms and figures of drills according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the drills have different qualities, the tooth is drilled from the side, and the drill between the teeth is according to other forms, and these forms of drills you shall prepare as you shall see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Extraction of Teeth.
Take care that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and take your time in the extraction of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the health of it when it is extracted, for it is substance sublime within that is excused in the extraction of it.
But take care when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you firmly ascertain which tooth is the painful one, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads you to believe that it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must ascertain which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then when you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums of all parts, and then make that with your own teeth, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concaves.
And then, in order to give a good hold, or a strong grip, place the head of the patient between your own teeth, which you hold well so that it does not harm, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one under it from all sides with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must compresses of cloth that broken and tighten that with the extremity of a fine ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with tongs.
And you must work exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard much your strength that you do not break it and remain part of it, and return upon the patient with the malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity about the extraction of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they make come upon the men maladies great ones which are more difficult to be extracted, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the mandible as many times we have testified.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with wine caut or wine with salt.
And if it should flow blood for this, as many times it should, then take some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and tongs subtle with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when with those you must work.
And be as often of thick handle so that when you tighten with those they are not bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some introne in the others and tighten by strong constriction, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so is guan, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Extraction of the Bones of the Jaws Broken.
When you must extract the tooth which is broken and remains any cause, then you must place upon the location a poultice with border for a day or two until the location is softened; and then introduce algesti or tongs the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guan, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of those be made of flint as if a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your easement with these forceps or tongs, then you must dig upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
Therefore if by this the root is fore-gotten, well is; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of more subtle extremity.
And already so helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form near the following: And with other instruments which I will precede in the rasping of teeth; for the juvament is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large onion, and this is the form:
Of the triangular, twisted or short limb, which is some thickness, and not enclosed so that it is not twisted.
And know that the instruments of the teeth move so and similarly the other instruments.
But the artificer skilled and subtle in the art, finds by himself according to what to him signifies the operation and the various diseases; because they are of the diseases to which the ancients did not say nor placed proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is twisted, or if it can be, then it is cured on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and helps with the gesture of which this is the form:
And if there is any thickness little by little, and is strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to it.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course by those the form is lagged, and mostly when it happens to women, and mostly to the venerable old ladies; therefore cove that you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment of it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp moving extremity.
And be your incision with which you incise that in too many days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not damaged another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
And be all of Indian iron the margin and very sharp; and be of small pointed points as much as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is damaged and caga. And then lineys that at the end, and root that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which a part is twisted and it licks the tongue, then cove that you file that until the aspect of that fraction is stayed and leveled, and be filled so that the tongue does not lick it nor the word is corrupted.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with a filling of gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the front teeth with concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which mangles, and you have cured that with styptic medicines, and it has not been of any use your cure, then for so that it does not cagan is generated in those that are strengthened with a filling of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes green and soon it can be seen after a few days, but gold at no time is changed.
And be the filling in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the form of the direction is that you take the filling and take the double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you increase with two tortuosities of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until it reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the tsement into the part of which you commenced, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And be your striccio with which you strengthen the filling of the roots of the teeth that it does not escape.
And then incise the extremities of the superfluous filling with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert those and the occult between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leys that as tight as a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filling in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the direction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as these tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the fall of each one, and they are grown as we have recounted, and that they are remaugued.
And this is done only by a good artificer and wise.
And sometimes it is adapted some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made as such as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which is under the tongue sometimes or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and happens by plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation on him is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevate his tongue, and then cut that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which the tongue is released from its recess.
But if in that there is any hardness or knot, and that is due to the consolidation of plaque, then you throw an ounce and cut it along the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the flesh of the chin and that you cut here artery and blood comes.
And then wash the traces of the incision with water or with wine or with cold water; and then place the tongue loose; so is the way which holds the patient's tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated again.
But if there occurs a flow of blood, place on the spot vitriol trissated; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with a cautery lantiginos the one which convenes to that. And then that cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes occurrences under the tongue an abscess resembling a small lump that prevents the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which the mouth is filled.
And the operation on him is that men open the mouth of the patient seeing before the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of a dark color or of black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that quarter because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the ounce in it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and cut it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place desus zegi trissat, that is vitriol, within which the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work within which you had treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure that with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of an abscess of two ears and of that which is nothing in the golayro and of the other abscesses.
When in the golayro gland feels, so are the glands which are assembled with a lump, which occur outside and are called two ears, which when you cure them with water that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; abandon it within it is matured, and then either you will draw that out, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of a white color, radon, and the root of it is subtle, then that is the one that must be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess of it has already rested with a complete rest or if it is diminished with any diminution; and then do so that the patient is seen before the sun, and the head of him is in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between their jaws the tongue of him with an instrument noble of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle with a knife.
Then as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and catz over that your gaze, then take ounce and place that in the amenla, and pull that to the parts outside as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then cut that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then cut that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, the one which is of indi iron embedded.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then cut that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a furrow, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient washes with cold water
But if there occurs a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes within which the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure that within which it is healed.
And sometimes there appear in the golayro other abscesses other than those two ears, and cut those according to that which I have said in the incision of two furrows equally.
And I have already treated a woman of an abscess which was in the golayro of her, which abscess tended to a dark color, of little sensation, which had already closed the golayro of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited to her food and drinking of water, and she had already arrived at death if may be it had stayed for a day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that for two months there were two openings through which it burst.
Then I cut it fistularly and stayed in one of the openings, and I pulled out that one, and it was thrown out a large portion, and then I incised that one where it understood from the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I stayed the opening in that abscess.
And then I drained a large portion of it, and it was not running from it except a little blood. Therefore, the abscess of that woman was completely drained, and she immediately began to drink water and eat light food, so I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and a new abscess succeeded in the place of that one, which incision extended while that one was prolonged.
Therefore I introduced a needle and cauterized the opening of it, so as to prevent further addition; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to me from that.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of the incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
When catarr appears on the boil, and it is abscesses and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not compare its healing, and it seems to you that the abscess has already cauterized and is subtle, then you should incisions that which is rounded; and if it is at that longitude, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in the patient's feeling, then you should attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient to lie and press its tongue with an instrument of which you proceed its form and then stay the opening in the new, and pull that down and incisions that with one of the instruments the ones which are said in the incision of two mills.
And so that you do not incisions that but what is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, because if you incisions of it more, you will lead to its speaking.
And after the incision, use of that which has been recommended in the incision of two mills, and cure that while it is healing.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, so that you use of the needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is only with sharp water, and it is that you stay the head of the patient in your, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and compare with that living cause, and stay that no thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the extremity of its concavity in which the medicine is placed be as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and stay the instrument with the medicine over the boil, and the patient yawns over his side so that it flows saliva or mucus of the mouth of that by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that for any cause over the opening of it and that it leads that.
And with your hand on the medicine, and express that over the uvula for the space of a half hour until you see that it is being blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cotton and envelopes that over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton into a tube of over into that the cotton adheres in that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want of the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that as it dries and falls after three or four days.
And if you should decide that you iterate the medicine, iterate that, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cotton dipped in border, and modify with that which is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured before with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healing.
And this kind of cure is more saving than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: Receive calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a pot, and be submerged with strong wine, and boil; and the pot be well beaten with decent lut, and be in the middle place of the pot a hole, on which be placed an instrument concavity of iron according to this manner; be made of silver or iron.
And be inserted the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the concavity, until the uvula be more obfuscated.
And then iterate over that many times until it is dry, and guard yourself that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the development of abscesses, because it would too adjust in the abscess, and do not that you do that, but you must declare the abscess of it caut.
But if you do not have this instrument at present, then take a cane and on one end of it make a hollow of wax, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the wax prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of other causes.
Many things, such as weeds adhered in the throat or a thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Therefore, you must extract what appears of those things, on which you cast your gaze, because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that it be declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for very often the cause annexed to the throat is brought forth by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or plug a piece of dry sea sponge with a thread, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they are brought forth. And yet take an eel and tie it with a thread, and its head is placed and its tail is extracted; or take a porcupine and  extract the quills and the spines from the middle.
But if they are not brought forth by those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker than a ray, and at one end of it be a concavity which you introduce into the throat with ease.
And hold his head elevated upwards, and guard that the touching of his bone of the throat, so that it may be drawn out and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that which the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient may be introduced into this, it is better, for his science of the place of the cause annexed and pushes down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is brought forth.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of bloodsucking attached to the throat.
When the leech is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have comprehended the tongue of him with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the leech, extract that with a small pin or with a subtle gesture gently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this so many times (until the leech is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain from the patient all day of water.
And then plug a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow from that any cause and wrong the water one hour after another with his hand, because the leech as soon as it feels the water catches.
But if it is not brought forth with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cumin or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall.
And there is another way of operation in the fumigation of that, which is that you take an olla in which there are burning embers and the olla be covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let go downwards the fumigation; and place the patient his mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not brought forth until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, because the leech will fall immediately.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain from the patient from drinking, and eat salty causes and alhs, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it be brought forth.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is treated from the throat when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that in it there is some curvature: Which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is smooth, in which is sharpened with a file, so that, when compressing any cause, it does not leave it.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the sermon in the view of abscesses and in the section of them.
Abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by that which we compress of the humidities.
And the second way is proper to the places where accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the abscess that happens in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess that happens in the joint; and to each of them is its own treatment by operation.
And more abscesses are some that should not be perforated but rather allowed to mature in those or the completion of them.
And other abscesses that should be drained when they are ripe, and not allowed to mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are located near the joints, because when an abscess occurs near a joint, its being is prolonged within those powers that are in the circuit of it, and very soon those ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes a contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a major limb, and if you delay its perforation before it matures, it will cause damage to the major limb; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it before it matures; and you should not perforate it crudely, due to incomplete digestion, but the one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not weaken its preon and extend it to the parts of the buttocks, and make a fistula, or that it is done in its term that it is not healed. But you must know the time of the abscess perforation, and thus it is when it is mature.
And know that it is mature when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and with the reduction of the heat and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
And because you must know the perforation to be done in the place pus of the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And perforation always should be along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use of perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is best to leave the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, it prolongates the body of its power and a lot of dirt, and very soon its lips are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to what the member indicates.
And you must administer small perforation, and in large abscesses large perforation and wide or many sections according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the wound should be concave and incised, when it is done so that bread is made and done in a term that already sticks, such as those that occur in groups of boils and buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one that is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, like the abscesses of the angles.
And of those are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision, and similar to those, are administered.
But that one to which there is no such as superficial abscesses, you must perforate that with a superficial perforation, or flat only.
And you must when the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, perforate that and do not try to extract all the power in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and so do this many times according to gradation until it is fully drained.
And most of all if the patient is of cold virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit many times is resolved with the exit of the pus, and very soon the patient dies, and you operate on them.
And guard this chapter with great care, and in the perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, you must abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is few, or a flat section, then you administer the qualms of it or of a counter-ointment; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must place a piece of cloth in each track until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the wound is cut off or has been concave in the circuit, then you must cover it with old ointment or thread made of cloth of it, as when you have treated bread or razors, its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process that and cure it with what is needed of the ointments until it is healed.
But if there occurs a flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which you wring a cloth of it, and place that over the place of the blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow persists, then you must administer regimen and cure and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and of division.
But if it is in wintertime, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must infuse powders in wine and hot oil, and place those on the places.
And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be applied until the third day, as we have said, and then you must untie the abscess and cleanse it and administer to its cure what is appropriate to it until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter XL.
Of the incision of abscesses which come in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are of a kind of nodes which contain tunics that are made of them; and the kinds of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those which contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are those which contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling them; and of those are those which are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must, the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in the incision of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes near thus, the one which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if what it contains is humidity, then you must cut it with a section according to the length by a superficial section according to this form:
And starting in the section of the line of .B. to the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave from that any cause of all, because troops once removed return, if there remains from that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, because with it you corrode all that is broken of that skin.
And then repeat over that wound with Egyptian ointment second and third time if you need it, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you must incise it according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and get oncis between the two lips of the section and scrape it from all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes contrary, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of incision and cure according to what we have told you; and incision over a stony abscess is lighter, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are on the head in some men with whom there is no humidity at all; the cause of which is because I incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and brought back the abscess as a hard, rough, white thing, which could not be pierced, and if someone was struck with that, it would cause a plague.
But in other abscesses accidents on the head, this is not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of the children and you must the roots of the ears, but the incision of these all should be superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body be relieved of the sania in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is appropriate for that cure.
Chapter XLI.
Of the incision of scrophulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and are many that are generated between them, and all scrofulas of those are within their own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrofulas are many, because of those are some stony, and of those are those which contain humidities, and of those are malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is soft to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not swollen, then you must incise that with a superficial section from the lower part to the upper part of the body from the line of .G. to the line of .B., and scrape it from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with an onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not hurt your hand when you make incisions, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; because if you were to cut a vein or artery and you prohibit yourself from your operation, then place in the wound vitriol tristat or other powders that cause blood to flow, and tighten the wound, and leave that within which rests the sharpness of the abscess and the wound is softened and begins to be pus-filled. When blood is drawn.
Therefore, return to your operation once you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofulous vein, then cover it so that you do not cut that scrofulous root. Cover it so that you place that with a strong bent wire and leave it so that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut that whole scrofulous, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as quickly as possible so that there is no superfluity of pus.
But if you see that there has been superfluity because of the greatness of the scrofulous, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer sutures and what is said.
And those of the scrofulas that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation so that it drains the pus from the base of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, poultices with ointment and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the section of the abscess of the pile within the groin.
The ancients said this section in the pile, and no one in our land has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a fissure, cover it so that the extraction of the pile be avoided, as for that it is not done well for their part because all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or groin or two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover it so that you use the section of the pile to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore, cover it so that when we want this, we cut the pile below three circles of the circles of the pile, or four with a small section for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the flesh, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are in it.
And if the doctor is fearful, cover it so that he extends the groin with an onion, and then cut the groin so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause of them.
And then cut the flesh according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal by the flame which is of that which is emitted with that which is of its disruption and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then, as the hour is remauguda in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the groin of the wound, and sew that alone if it is cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposure is nothing but when you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the groin of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the skin of it is between-sected, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for this reason, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then cover it so that you heal the wound until it is healed.
And what I have seen myself, is that a servant took a knife and put it in his groin and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and I brought the woman as it is said of the dead, and I uncovered the wound and brought the blood which was coming out of the wound little by little.
Therefore, I confessed that he had not cut a vein nor guidegi, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if he did not complain in the voice, and after some days, he returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision on an abscess which occurs in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental one is in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is made by a blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And do not make presumption about it as if it were iron, but only in the one that is small. And then probe that and investigate that with the finger, and if you find that it resembles a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it as you would with the nodes, and extract that with what contains it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then carefully examine its entire being, and then treat the area with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision of the kinds of nodes.
Of nodes there are many kinds, and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division.
And I advise you to count thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as if you were in doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pain until the boiling of the superfluity is calmed; and it is complicated by putrefaction that at the hour the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts as that lump lion which is in the one sac proper.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cheese and is made thus as a void, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two kinds, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you examine it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument which is called intromes, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is near this.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the moistest place which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve your fingers with that little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
And then finally your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry it over it with a incision having the form of a cross according to this form: as you are taught, and suspend that with splints, and exfoliate the skin of all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that pus with the node.
But if it is ruptured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it is necessary to do so, and then you extract it in pieces until there remains no cause from it.
Because if from it remains no cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains some small part, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place on it a cautery of the abscess, and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what is necessary for healing.
But if a pulsating vein is in it, or not-pulsating, then you coat and moisten the place with a three-times-diluted vitriol and leave it there for two or three days until you can scar the wound and that the boiling of the blood is calmed; and then return to incise what is ruptured from the node.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three kinds, of which one is large, and of them is medium, and of them is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They should be made of iron, of lead, of extremities well-rounded, so that they easily enter the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experients, and they are called probes, and one of them is called a berid.
And there are three kinds, of which one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, its form:
The form of the medium one, its form:
The form of the small one, its form:
It is conveyed that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes, so that between them are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, like needles, as large as needles, with which the threads are sewn, and they are made of citrus metal, or lead, or iron, or silver, and the best are when they are made of citrus metal.
And they are made the instruments of black plume, the ones which are agreed that for those they are openings the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three kinds, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Form of the large instrument of lead:
Form of the medium instrument of lead:
Form of the small instrument of lead:
The forms of the probes are of many kinds, for some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three kinds.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And of them are those having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small probe, form of it:
Form of a large probe having two curvatures: Form of a medium probe having two curvatures: Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds, for some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be done gently in the scraping of the nodes the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for those it may be healed the ailment and return tranquility a little by the burning which devours the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
They are made of metal and are similar to a ray with which and made alcohol.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a hidden spatula and in that it runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and are not perceived by the ailments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three kinds; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citrus metal, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And cover that these kinds of cupping glasses are large, medium, and small, so that by those you abscise the flow of blood with speed in necessity, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, as in the folds of the arms and thighs, and in the folds of the arms, and of the breasts and belly and groin, and similar to their fleshy folds moist.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments other small ones resembling scorpions of fish according to this form; by which the blood is abscised when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .forty-seventh.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men become inflamed due to the fact that they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples become inflamed, and the nipples are assembled like those of women, and are removed, far away.
And to him who suffers this, it is necessary to cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then scrape the entire thickness, and then fill the wound with a medicinal ointment, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for him until it is healed.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it is cut in two halves of its surplus, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one should be contained in the other, as long as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the flesh which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suturing and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of this which must be cut due to the restlessness of the patient, and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cotton swab submerged in corrosive liquid and leave it until the corrosive corrodes what is left of the flesh, and then care for him until it is healed.
Chapter .forty-eighth.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the kind of scrophulas, hard, which have a skin that is sac.
And of these, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as soon as everything that is in the abscess of the healthy is evacuated, then you fill it with old cotton and leave it for the other day.
And then the cotton is removed and it is cured with a suitable ointment to the wound, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind of nodes and scrophulas, then you dissect it as we have said in the section about scrophulas equally.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a pockmark, then administer cautery to it as we have said before.
Chapter .forty-ninth.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the flesh which is above it is consolidated, then often abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: that when the abscess is due to the artery, it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
And that one which is due to the vein is round and manifest on the surface of the body.
And to dissect an abscess in this case is an error, and especially in those which are below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or in the head, should be avoided.
But over that which is of them due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, dissect it in the flesh with a long incision; and then probe the incision with forceps and the artery, and delirate the tunics until it is exposed.
And then put a needle on it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to see the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is removed, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which is engendered power until the ligaments fall; and then care for it with suitable ointments to the wound until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a cut vein, then you must have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the flesh, and then introduce the needle below the place which you have had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the needle with that needle below the entire abscess, after the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it until when it is dried, all that is in it, then you dissect the superfluity of the flesh, and leave what of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calxes and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to a twist of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or caused by excessive work, and similarly.
And it is made in the places of the auxiliaries or the heel, or in any place where the joints are inflamed.
And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and in the majority of its dispositions it is in the form of a boil, and when it is tightened with force, the patient feels like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason the code is left, and it is inflamed in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, because it will greatly increase contraction.
But those that are in the head or on the forehead, close the wound with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then cut it with the forceps and excise it by the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excoriate it, and then cover it; and adjust the bandage with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 2.
Of the incision of an abscess that occurs from a boil that occurs in the belly.
Some men have boils that appear on their bellies and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because of their resemblance to fungi, of which the root is thin and the head is thick; and already the lips of these are turned inward, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are magnificently swollen.
And I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were turned inward and were splitting, and moisture was running from it all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and attributed one in weight of about eighteen ounces. and the other about six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of those is that you consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of fine root; then you should incise it with a spatula, and keep a cauterizer in the fire, because many times the blood must be expelled from the section; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient pale and fearful, guard yourself from incising with iron; but then take a piece of fresh lead made, and strengthen it with that boil, in the manner that we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then, adjust the lead thread in the stricture; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly, until it is excised and falls by itself through its work.
But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and fear, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you should incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise those that are of dusky color, of little feeling, of slight regard, because those are cancerous abscesses.
And I come with a recollection of cancer, therefore.
Chapter 3.
Of the cure of an eminence of the umbilicus.
Eminence of the umbilicus is made by many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is above the belly, and from which the web or intestine comes out according to how it should be in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from the vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by constricted wind in it.
But if it is by a fissure of the fascia and by the protrusion of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion-like in its pain, and then appears from different positions. And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of it with that which we have recounted, of much more variety, and when you press it with your fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and very much is felt in it, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bathing and violent work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lion-like and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs the abscess appears in black declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion-like.
And the operation in it is that you consider if the eminence of the umbilicus is by blood from the artery, or from the vein, or by wind; then you should be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the cloth, then command the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then feel in the circumference of the whole navel, and then command him to lie between his hands on his two, and then surround with a spatula wide in the circumference of the navel on the place which you have marked with the tentacle; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and then tie it in the circumference with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then break the edge of the extended abscess over the ligament and introduce your finger into that point and feel for the hernia; and if you have found it or guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and impel the hernia to the parts outside of the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take that with a hook; and cut away the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that part, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circumference which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place between that which you can feel the extended flesh and fall by itself; or cut that when it is subtle and you can, and then care for that with water that is given of the roots while it is healing.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then command that you hollow out the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then care for that with water that is given and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
As we have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is through medicine to the cure of it, and that it is shunned in it the cure with iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And they said the ancients that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the limbs allocated to extract all that, and more when it is beginning small.
But when it is ancient and is large, no command that you have propriety to it, because I have not been able to heal from that nor have I seen another, nor that it has come to that.
And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black cholera sometimes, and then bleed that, if it is found manifest repletion.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located with operation, and then prohibit in the tract hooks which command to that; and then concave of all parts with the good saw, thorough extraction so that no remains any cause of the roots of it. And let the blood run, and do not cut that lightly, and express the places, and cleanse the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible to you of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flux of the blood is ceased, and then care for that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of dropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of dropsy of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicine.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of hyposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of tympanistres dropsy with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if the patient has already been achieved debility, or is with that other malady other dropsy, as if it is in it cough or belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate it with iron, because fear is over that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in it there is no other malady but dropsy so only, and not child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of it with his hand, impelling the water to the part below the navel, and then take spatula spiny according to this form:
be of two parts acute long, of acute extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some shortness small by small, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the hernia, and that leads that.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is of the part of the hernias, because then command that with the section you are distant from the navel for the quantity of three digits to the parts below, in the right of it over the navel.
But if the generation of dropsy is by malady of the liver, then your section be left of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of him is by the spleen, then the cut shall be on the right side.
And beware that the cut should not be on the side on which the patient wants to lie, so that the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
And then perforate with the instrument the entire channel, and then introduce yourself into that incision, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the channel and the siphon, and you will scrape that; and if the quantity of a nail or around.
And then perforate the siphon until the spatula reaches the desired place, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of brass or of lead, to which at the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the most sovereign extremity of it is an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately it is loosened upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates the water in the middle hour a quantity, for if you evacuate more than that in the hour, very soon the patient will die by resolution of his animal spirit, or you will bring him to five-pi that is approaching death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the virtue of its pulse and from the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause for as soon as it is retained by the channel which retains the hole that is on the siphon of which and recommits to you that you perforate that according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument the next day if the patient tolerates the water, and extract a small quantity of the water, and do water for some days out of fear, and guard yourself from error lest the water remains but little.
But if you fear about the patient, and let out a great quantity of water, then cure that with burial in dry sand, and bathe him in a bath, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver near the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter .lv.
Of the cure of the children who are born with the places of the urine not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are thus from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to repair with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then place in the hole a small lead nail and ligate that, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate it is remedied and urinates; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not leave this opening.
But that one of whom the hole is straight be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are ledged, the cause is that of those, that one who is born and the hole is the end of the head of the vagina because it cannot urinate in the parts of the midst, until it elevates the vagina with its hand to the parts above; and it is not to its generation, for because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be inverted upon his two, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscise the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is incision of a feather, or that you do not scrape any part, for so that the middle of him comes similar to the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place according to what is necessary.
And guard yourself in the operation of the flux of blood, for many times accidents happen in this; and pause yourself to it with the water that you abscind the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albation of the one that happens in the prepuce in the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albater happens in the vagina and is a swelling of flesh very bad.
And of that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
Non-malignant, so that you suspend with a fine unci and abscind that until that one mends entirely; and then place over that cotto submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then that, cure it with diaphicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the albater is malignant, of a leg color, then you must administer cauterization to the incision of it and the root of it.
But if there is a tear in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tear is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must treat the tear that is inside first while it is still fresh; and then you treat the outside one, because when you treat the outside one at the same time as the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
And if there are wounds and corruption in the genitals and foreskin, then you must cleanse all that which is already decayed and which is about to corrupt or which is already corrupt; and then apply a liniment to it with honey, which is mixed with the powder of the rind of quince and of herbs crushed and sifted.
And then treat it with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because a helpful cautery is in two dispositions at once, so it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed all at once, then you must insert a lead pipe into the flesh of the foreskin so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those who are uncircumcised, and on whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) you must excise with a blunt spatula until it is dissolved the ligament and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must excise with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated by its own thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of silk, which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of those things that happen to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those who are children, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way less hardship for the sake of health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the reason for which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and with torments; and they use ligatures with thread and incisions with the nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and have not found better purification with shears, with a ligature with thread than with purification with the nail, because many times the wound escapes the lower part, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains further down, and it is very easily forced to another incision and sure pain. And in purification which is done by the alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed, because it easily enters into the trough of it.
But in the operation with the nail, very easily it is observed iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it does not need purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is done with shears and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown to me, because the shears are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharpnesses, and you incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis on all sides, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down most if it is of those that understand a little, that you do nothing but tie the thread in his penis only, and that you leave that in for another day.
And then do that to cheer him in all that manner that is possible to you that receives his intelligence. And then make him lie down between your arms, prepared, and do not be seen by him; and hide the shears in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then put your hand to his penis and blow into the foreskin, and pull that inward until the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify that which is attached to it of dirt.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let one be non-cutting and the other cutting, so that the handle of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points is like the length of two arms equally.
But the error in modification is that if the strong left escapes the intrinsic cord entirely, or part of it, you must make an incision.
Therefore, as you extend that one with your fingernail in front of the abscess and make an incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that one with a needle and make an incision.
But if three days have passed, and that which is inflamed remains, after the abscess has burst, then you let it drain until it is softened, and exfoliate it with ease, and make an incision according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the abscess, for it would not be good for you.
And therefore cure it with the remedy that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
And if it is incised from the cord excessively, and it obeys the parts above, it does not hurt.
But cure it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made by a stone or by a clot, or by a tumor or by a piece of flesh, and similar to those of water which we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is very vehement on the patient, then you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and is a subtle long cone, as well as a tube of bird's feather with the subtlety of a long ray in the likeness of one palm and a half, to which there is a subtle tube in the head of it.
And the manner of the emission of urine by this is that you take the flexible and tie it in the middle with wool or thread for a good binding; and introduce the extremities of the flexible into the part below the syringe, and make an incision with the forceps if there is any cause of wool, but introduce it into the tube with force, and then push the syringe with a border and with album of egg.
And make the patient lie on his back, and rub his bladder and the abscess with olive oil, and olive oil, and water.
And then introduce the syringe with ease until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and then double the abscess above the navel; and then push the syringe inside that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient has reached the cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And then extend the flexible with the wool little by little, so that the urine seeps the wool.
Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to this.
When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or a clot, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
But in the middle of it is a blind end, so it is closed. And in that there are three tubes: two from one side, as well as.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which is the water that is poured in, and according to the quantity that it fills, it is added, so that when any cause is withdrawn by that from the humidities, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to that the clampcedra does with which it is phicat naphta in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to pour humidities into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and push with that water that is poured into the upper parts, so that the humidity is poured into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the abscess as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push the humidity with that water, so that that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Form of the catheter, by which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or lead, of which the tip is like a small feather, and below it a tube is inserted.
And then take the bladder by itself, and put in it the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligature, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the moisture with structure descent until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not feel the bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that with all its roundness; and then insert a strong needle into those holes, so that it is turned; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofat, because you put in that water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that onto the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of stones.
We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with a hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I am narrating this with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that stones generated in the bladder mostly come to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is passed from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his urethra, and often weeps, and then it is dressed; and with that, the anus is pierced in many of those.
And it is easier the healing of children of those who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is milder because of what is among those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must, at the beginning of it, modify the patient with a catheter that extracts all the fissure that is in their bowels; because that fissure sometimes prohibits the introduction of the stone, and the inquiry of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and sit them down and make them groan so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or that which jumps from the place or some times.
And then make that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are left the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the parts below.
And then pierce that and all of that through.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately take a section on it.
And if you do not catch all of it from your touch, then you must cover with oil your fingertip of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said finger if it is a young man complete, and introduce that into his anus. And pierce the stone until it stays below your said finger. And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your finger, and expel that to the outside parts of the bladder where the place of the section is.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand, he re-moistens the cord which is below the genitals, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then introduce a spatula well incident of which this is the form of it: And divide in it the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but to the left side of the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the stone, and no more, because very strong compresses your finger which is in the anus the stone and it is thrown away from its faculty.
And know that of the stone there is some to which the angle and margins are, so that the extraction of it is made difficult by that.
And of that one, the water is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it easy extraction.
Therefore, if it is that one to which the angles and margins are, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not so thrown away, then you must engage on that, or that you strengthen on that with a gentle movement, the extremity of which is like a file with which you strengthen on the stone, and do not escape from it; or that you introduce below it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot reach that, then you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off strongly with thrice-saturated vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut above it; and then push a little near it; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision, because you bring the patient one of two causes: either death or that it causes a continuous distillation of urine, because of which the place is not completely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is outside, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps while you extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointments of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and vinegar, so that the pus may be yielded.
And then turn the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandages until the third day.
And when you have untied it, wash the place with water and a little oil, and then cure it with diaphoni and diazabilic gargles until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs pus, thick and corrosive, and of that semblance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and because of it urine is prohibited (and this is known by the emission of blood in urine), then intervene with your word in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all species, with whatever you deem appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
And cover during all the hours of the cure that you lay both things and adjust the medicines which are placed over the wound.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and it is lodged there, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with water which I recommend before you reach incision, because many times by this cure it is accused of incision; and already I have explained this, and it is that you take a steel drill, of which this is the form:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fitted into a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie it with that to the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then intervene the iron in the urethra, perforating with facility until the drill comes to that stone. And revolve the drill with your hand in that stone little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand over what is broken of the stone from the side of the urethra, because that is loosened, and is ejected with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not appropriate to you for any cause which prohibits it, then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then cut above the stone in that urethra between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligature and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is untied, the stone's residue returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the stone to the upper parts, or that you return your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely generated.
But if a stone is seen in any of those, then its cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman, if she is very young, is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-versed who describes herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is of women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not have a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision over the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because you must make a pre-incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity provokes you to that, then you must take a woman doctor well-versed, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a man doctor who is skillful and subtle, or present a woman matron well-versed in the way of women, or a woman who in this art has a share of the art.
Therefore, do that present, and command him to do everything that you tell him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason for which is that he should observe whether the woman is a virgin, then when she puts her said into the anus of her and wants the stone.
Therefore, if it is found that she is, force her to put her said, and then command her to lie on it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her said into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehend that with good understanding.
Therefore, if it is found that she is, then she must gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And then lie on that position of the majority of the vagina, at the root of the vagina, from which part she is stopped and place the stone in that part, and the said of her not be removed from the stone, cut as she may.
And the section be little at the beginning; and then insert the ray on that section, and if she feels the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which she knows that the stone is cast from there.
And know that the species of stone are many: for some are small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species are of her by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissated and place it for an hour until the blood is abstained, and then return to your operation until the stone is cast out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments the ones which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you place powder on the place and tighten that with poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Therefore, when the acuity of the blood is ceded after some days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the stone is cast out.
Chapter LXII.
Of incision upon hernia.
Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sheath which is below the codpiece of the genitals containing the  fluid, and it is named sheath.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared nature in the part of the penis, before it is known that there is another penis; and it is the codpiece of the genitals between the white sheath which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which happens to the genitals, for that to those is poured this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this moisture is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or roe, or it is black and feculent, or it is aqueous white, and this is what is most.
And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water is this: for if it is in the white sheath which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little in length as such as the figure of the penis, and appears the genitals, for the moisture contains that of all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round with the part of the penis and by this man estimates that it is another penis.
And if the moisture is between the codpiece of the genitals and the white sheath, then catz below the sentiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you probe the color of the moisture in the abscess with a pointed instrument of which the shape is preceded; and according to what is seen in the trace of the instrument, judge of what is contained in it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then we must command the patient to be flebotomized if that is to you possible, and times the body of him full.
And then he should be recumbent upon his two upon some cause a little high, and place below him many cloths.
And then set you upon the left part of him, and command the minister to follow on the right of him, the one which extends his  arm to one of two sides to the codpiece of the genitals and to the part of the navel of the belly.
And then take a spatula broad and split the codpiece of the genitals from the middle place by the length until near the penis.
And be made the section according to rectum equally distant from the line which goes through the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white sheath encompassing.
And excoriate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert that; and your excoriation with which you excoriate by a  wide part that it be suspended with the penis most and subtly scrutinize with the excoriation according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals that encompasses, and incise the bladder in that manner that is to you possible. And incise that [bladder] with its entirety or in parts, and mostly its subtle width, for if you do not meticulously scrutinize the incision of it, it is not made certain that the water will not return.
But if the  fluid proceeds from that outside of its cord during the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and then care for it as well as the other plagues, until it is healed.
And if the fluid is corrupted by another malady, then cover that you cut the vessels that are over the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then care for it with the water that we have said.
But if the water is added in two parts simultaneously, then know that two are the hernias; therefore incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it is an operation, then you do it.
And then you should cleanse the blood, and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or in rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the mirac of the belly; and place above folded cloths and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and be them filled with carded wool according to this resemblance; and be made the extremities with which is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and be added with structure in the braguier of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock inside to the other two, and the second presses to the part of the thigh, and two extremities over two cushions left and two other extremities over two angles, and all structure be adjusted in the braguier of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and that you incise with that the cord of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted until it is discovered the white bladder containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cautery, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the bladder with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to what is to you possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from blood flow, and better than operation with incision.
But if to you causes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then cover that you cure that contrariety that does to you by that, with cure which convenes to it according to what is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to what we recount here; and it is when it is certified of you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is aqueous.
Then cover that you make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
And then place over the location cloth and tie that and leave that, so that the remaining of the water flows out. And then cure that until the plague is healed.
But if contrariety is in the emission of the water in that hour you pierce that: and that is not done except for that because the white pannicol in the orifice of the plague causes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water, then cover that you put in the plague a probe or instrument with which is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opening of the plague a small [instrument].
And know that the water returns, and it is gathered again after about six months or around those; and as it is gathered, then be perforated according to that same manner, so that the patient thus will pass his days.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of incision on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the incision on this hernia there is fear of losing to perniciousness in the major dispositions; for to me it is seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And I you remembering the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and that is done for many causes: or by superfluity acute aggravated, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious abscess.
And a hard abscess is solidified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is made by a knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those in such a way that already the remembrance of it is perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and no cover that you touch.
But that which is made by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from it by any cause of the compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this kind a section is made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the point of the knife, and then extend the bowel to the lower parts, and extract it from the white sheath, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory as much as you deliver it from all parts of the bowel.
Therefore if the bowel is already among those flesh consolidated, then you must extract the bowel and incise it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the sheath, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the bowel as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of a hernia that is of the womb.
A hernia is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this disease is by fear of that which is preceded by remembrance.
However, it is necessary to say operation in it according to that which I have done in the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on an elevated cushion; and then palpate the suspensory of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the point of the knife with your fingers among the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other instruments that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then incise with a broad sharp knife by transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate of all parts as we have said in the extraction of the artery which is in the temples.
And then put in those a needle which is double-pointed, and tie that in the first of the places where you have incised the vit, and tie that other time in the rear of them. And then incise those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated of the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you wish to be healed so that the vessels which are cut by one of the two genitals do not harm for that.
But if you have incised the vit to all the vessels, then you must extract the testicles or that the testicles by that are squeezed with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be withered, or that squeezed so that it not be helpful with those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that occurs in the sheath extended over the belly of part of the angles of the navel of the belly, for that descending the bowels of that rupture to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the sheath or of an excision of it, and these two kinds occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by a seizure, or by a shout, or by elevation of any heavy cause, or by similarities.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the sheath, is that it occurs little by little in long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within the veins for that the sheath compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is by a section of the sheath, for at the beginning it makes occur vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess diverse apparent below the proper cord apparent, and that is for the exit of the bowel, and the body of it to the parts before the sheath.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the bowel the membrane, and this hernia intestinal is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the bowel torn, and here it is retained, and it is with this great harm of the disease, and sometimes it makes become pain evil and more when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the kinds of this disease with iron there is fear, for that it must be avoided the incision in it.
And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts inside of his cavity if he obeys his return, and then it is placed on his chest between your hands, and elevate the legs of him.
And then tighten the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and incise the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix in two lips of the section with pins according to how you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that to you is possible that of that the fluid be let out.
And then scrape that which is under the cord of the testicles, until that the white hard bulb of each part be discovered.
Now you introduce your finger into that which is the testicle, which is between the white bulb, which is below the cord of the fluid, and between the second bulb, and dissolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the fluid.
And then hold with your hand the cord of the testicles to the parts in front, and with this extend the white bulb on your left hand, and elevate the fluid with the bulb to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the fluid upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard bulb. But if you find of it any cause, then you enclose that to the belly below.
And then incise in the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which blood and serum will run as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and some times the white bulb is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of it for fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the ligament until that by itself it falls.
But if the case of him is delayed, then of water boiled be embrocated, and place over that until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  a  ventous hernia.
In this hernia it has not been seen that any has been bold on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place in surrounding the abscess with that which opened it, until that the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to that we have said until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the dislocation that is made in the angonars.
Sometimes it happens that rupture in the angonars as we have said, and emerge the place.
And do not let to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they let, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, it is adjusted fissure in the bulb until that the intestine descends in the bulb; and happens that for the extension of the bulb which is in the angonars as we have said, which cause is that the bulb is extended, and then it is softened and the place is abscesses and emerges.
And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his two between your hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerged with a section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then tighten the white bulb that is below the cord until that it be discovered.
And then take the ray and place that over the prominent place of the bulb, and press that to the front of the belly.
And then stitch the two prominent places on the extremity of the ray of the bulb, and adjust with the suture one of those with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the rib, and do not cut into the head of all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause as I will tell you to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you cut the fibers, purify that and restore the wound while it is consolidated; because the head is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more appropriate to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of softening the cord of the testicles.
Often it happens that the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is felt the regard of it.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it that he make the patient lie according to his two, and cut all the cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then that he adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by cure of other wounds until it is healed and the fibers fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excused, but for a cause it is good for me to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which one is so that it is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our benefit because of them, as well as of goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast in warm water until its genitals are softened and are limp and hanging. And then take those with your hand while they are soft and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, as you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles of it with your left hand.
And then lie the suspensory, and cut above each testicle with a section between two testicles processed.
And then cut those as you will have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the head any cause, but the fine head which is above the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done by attrition, because attrition strong leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that it appears in that which separates the space in the cord of testicles, in that one which is between two testicles figures as a woman's cunh in which it is.
And sometimes from that cord urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the woman's cunh on the pental is as two testicles of a man a little of all joined at the front part as the prepuce of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that as you cut those fleshy parts adjusted while the impregnation of it escapes, and then that you cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men of which you urinate which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh by causes of the women.
Lenting is very much adjusted over natural causes while it is stretched and is made to appear; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it is spread as in men and serves for intercourse.
Therefore as you have the superfluity of lenting with your hand or with an oil and cut it.
And do not ultimately in incision, mostly in the prepuce of the racit, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
And then cure it with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
But flesh born is flesh that is born in the horrifici of the mother while it fills it, and very much it is issued to the front parts according to the semblance of a tail (and for that some first call it "tail disease"); therefore as we cut it as we cut lenting, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the cure of hernia.
Hernia is when the woman's womb is not pierced, or the opening is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and that is made either by flesh not well adjusted or by a subtle or thick membrane.
And it is made either in the front of the womb, or in the sides of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examining the womb, if the swelling is apparent, it is proven; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the swelling is due to a subtle membrane, and it is present in the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you place powders on the two labia, and then place your fingers, indicating both hands at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle membrane be ruptured and the swelling be opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and jagua with honey every day so that the incised area not be consolidated.
But if the membrane is thick and thick, then you cut that with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
But if the swelling is due to flesh, then you suspend that with a thread, and incise it.
And be with you the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood from biting, such as hacathia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plaque not be consolidated slightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calx of lime.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it be healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the womb's nativity of other flesh, and then you cut according to this manner. But if this is due to a carbuncle, the carbuncle which is in the womb not be made contrary to iron in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and tail and red botch that happens in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids so appear from the openings of many veins through which blood continually flows; and as they are old hemorrhoids and are made theyls.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the front of the womb and do not appear to the touch, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the womb over which cats feel, those are those that are cured.
And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the heml with the shears, or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razors.
And then pulverize over those of the blood flow of one of the incision-causing powders, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then apply the heat to her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that seizure in decoction of sumat and of the bark of millegraines and of guaias and of similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water over the back of her.
And if the blood is abscessed, it is good; and if not, make adhere to the two windpipes, and to the nipples their scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of guaivier with vinegar and make adhere to the area; and then cure the area with incense until it be healed.
And cure that until it be healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of perforation of the eyssedura that happens in the womb.
Many species of abscesses happen in the womb, such as carbuncles and abscesses, and ulcers, and buboes, and erysipelas, and hemorrhoidal fistulas, and varicose veins, and heml, and other abscesses. And I have already said these illnesses and their species and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And I must say in this treatise of abscess that comes in the womb when it is of the abscesses that collectives heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it stings on that, then do not cut it with perforation, and care for it with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then, cover the woman on a couch that has two cushions; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part behind the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with some bandage to what is convenient.
And then the matron follow the straight path and administer the instrument with which is opened the orifice of the womb, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done afterward.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray on the prepuce of the womb of the woman, and that which from the instrument is entered into the womb not be more than the prepuce of the womb and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the prepuce of the womb, then you must place powders on the texture of the prepuce of the womb so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instruments in the prepuce of the womb.
And then you must place the vertigo that runs in the instrument of the path above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertigo until the orifice of the womb be opened.
And when the excrescence appears, and it is touched with the hand and is clean and moist, then you must succeed that of the head of it with a spatula.
And when the sania is evacuated, then you must place in the wound a meca submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which there is some stickiness; and place the calca7 in the section in the prepuce of the womb.
And place a fore the womb and on the penile linen clean submerged in water in which there are boiled mallows.
And then it is cured after two days with rinsing which is convenient to it until it be healed.
And some times the womb and the wound is washed in such a way that it is christened with water and honey, and then with water in which the root of lily or long-stemmed aristolochia is boiled, and then returns to the rinsing.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then you must be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care of it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are second nature.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express to the parts behind and desires to smell the air, and above that is relieved by what is above her of the birth, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this birth is second nature, and it is the emission of it on its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then you must compress the belly of her so that the embryo descends lightly, and when they descend on its head, they give it the second one, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is other this birth is unnatural and not laudable, because when the embryo is emitted on its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it .i., or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, necessary cause is to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she be guarded from error and deception.
And you have shown all figures of those, and which kind is in those by so that it be signified by it and be stood upon it.
When the fetus is emitted on its head by natural egress, and that is vehement on the woman and is made to her difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what the women have it, and evaporates the cone of it with fenugreek cooked and with humid oils.
And then intermeddle the metron between its said spatulas small and fenda with it the second one, or succed that with her nail until it runs that which is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fetus.
But if they do not descend, then you must christianize the woman of mucellage of ptilli and mucellage of fenugrec with  a  scissors.
And then command to it, to the christened one, that it be compressed and make that stornudar with conditions; and take the mouth of it and the nose of it for an hour, because the fetus will be for-gotten soon.
And if the two masses of the fetus are for-gotten at the beginning, then you must reduce those with facility little by little. But if she does not obey the entrance, then place the woman upon a cushion and lift her feet up, and then shake the cushion on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
And if the hands are not detained and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body of the fetus to your hand with cloth and extract it with equality, because that is a forgotten hole.
When the fetus is on its feet, then you must push those up, and then turn the small fetus, and then make it equal, and then take one of its legs and extend those little by little.
But when it comes out between the thighs, then you command it to express itself, and make that expulsion with condition, because it is forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until you place it back in that second natural figure, because that is then forgotten with light descent.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recounted, then take of althea and dissolved gum, and beat all in the mortar with good percussion, and then line with that the vagina of the woman, the lowest part of her belly. And then make that censer in boiling water, until it reaches the hypocondria.
And when the parts of her are softened, then make a sub-fumigation of myrtle to her and place that under her. And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then you make her lie on a cushion, and then make that expulsion and extract the mouth of her, and take from that, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus is soon forgotten.
Descent of the fetus laterally while holding one of its hands. It is engineered in the reduction of its hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make that go.
And if it cannot go, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement concussion, and then administer liaments which I have and recounted of mucillages.
And if it has come the childbirth, then make her lie on a cushion, and then study about the reduction of the hand, and turn the fetus according to the natural figure, and make the expulsion of the woman and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Descent of the fetus onto the back with its hands spread out and its fascia is at the back of its mother. Make that the midwife has the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and that with facilitation.
And when it is and as much as it is turned, and then place on the vagina what we have recounted of oil and mucellages.
And then command her to push little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a cushion and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make that expulsion with condition. Exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
When the horrors of the mother are released in this manner, consider, and then you cut the second one with your nail until it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you cut that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus to the upper parts until you place that second that you cover, and command the woman to compress herself some times, and it will be forgotten with light descent, if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and hard to endure; but it is because of nature, and not alive.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by a cap, distinguish those among the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten as if it were one fetus by light natural descent, and they are born sometimes by non-laudable descent as we have recounted.
And if some of their parts are difficult to bring to the childbirth and they have not arrived at what we have said of the unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with slowness, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the ingenious one bringing to health.
A remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have already verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to ten, the cause of which was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this cove that is in the science of the midwife, for it is very necessary to that part resembling that, and therefore it is necessary to do what cove.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medication and it is not brought out, and you are forced to use the operation with your hand, then it is necessary to consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and is not in any of the accidents by which she is feared to be harmed.
Then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on her bed, and her head be inclined downwards and her thighs be raised.
And the minister has those two parts or is tied in the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oils and with mucilage of althea and fennel and seeds of licorice.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she introduces her hand with ease into the mother, and then she seeks with her hand in the place where the fetus lies.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that it descends upon its head, and then you put the forceps in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or even the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or even the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon the feet of it, then in the pelvis, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that he has the forceps with his right hand, and pauses the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and introduces his hand with ease and puts the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until he reaches the left cause.
And then he pauses and puts in the position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be an extension according to its rectum only.
And be careful to all parts, so that the expulsion of it be alleviated as it is done in every case of its eradication.
And it is necessary in it that what is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them with skill and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is brought out, then the forceps are changed into the place which is more outer; and do so until the whole fetus is brought out.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be enveloped over it; and then extract it until the whole is brought out, and incise it either in the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so it is necessary to do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it in the expulsion, or there is water adjusted in its head, then it is necessary that it is introduced between the fingers of the spinous scapula and split the head and extract the water, or that which describes this with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly do if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then it is necessary that it is incised with the algematu, or that it is pressed with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is brought out and is constricted by the fork, then it is split until the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys the expulsion, then you incise the head as soon as it is possible for you.
And if the remains of the womb are inflamed or are in it hydropic, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the water that is in it flows out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its traction is lighter and its direction to the mouth of the womb is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the feet, then cover what you extract with the cloth that you will have enveloped over your hand, and that you make the belly and the feet inside so that what is in them runs.
But if the other members are still and the head turns, then the midwife puts her left hand in; but if the mouth of the womb is closed, then she puts her hand in the perineum, and seeks with that the head, and pulls it with her fingers into the mouth of the womb, and then inserts in it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with them.
And if the mouth of the womb is closed by an abscess that happens to the one, then cover that it not be trebled over it; cover that then administer effusion of humid fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, be it pricked; and be it administered the water that we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then be it incised in parts, and be it extracted.
And cover that you do not leave any cause of the second.
And when you will have completed your whole operation, then administer the water that we have said of the cure in the abscesses caused by the ones that happen to the mother.
And if there happens a flux of blood, then send down in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was a dead fetus, and then on that same fire another pregnancy, and then a dead fetus is the other. It happened to one a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated so that a fire opened, and it began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague did not consolidate.
Then I put on him some causes of plasters of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing some days, and extracted another bone; and I was too marvelled, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I continued to treat the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, cured of him a little of pus.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to that which the physician artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the vertigue with which the womb is opened:
This is the form of the stretcher in which the planks are fastened, to which fastening there are two vertigues in two extremities of two planks. But however this vertigue cover that it be more subtle of strictori, and be made or of iron or of wood of boys.
And be the width of each plank two fingers and the margin of each one two fingers, and the length of each one is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two planks there are two adjustments of that same plank, the length of which is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additaments are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed vertigues.
Other form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
Be made of iron bars or wood according to the likeness of forceps. But however at the extremity of it there are two additaments as if, and the length of those additaments is about one palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want with those to open the womb, then you make the woman lie on her back with her feet dangling, open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the womb until the midwife makes it that you want.
The form of the vertigue the which said the ancients:
Form of impellent with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of amisidat2 with which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth at the extremity, as if, and some times it is made long as if forceps according to this form, as if, to which there are teeth as if teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. Form of amesidat pauc:
Form of an unci having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is separated:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of them and they are prepared, the artificers are more light in their operation and more useful to men by their quantity.
And in the works of those instruments, whatever they may be, you must be prepared, because the need for them is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the secundina.
When the secundina is retained after childbirth, then you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her strain with condition, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and over her nostrils, and if by this it is expelled, it is good.
And if not, then you take an olla and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs boiling in the mouth of the mother, thus like calamint and rue and aneth and chamomile and sicadas arabic and cinnamon and centaury. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the olla, and place that over the fire.
And then place a pipe of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make her strain as we have said, and the secundina is expelled with speed.
But if this cure remains and it is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with that for the secundina, and as she has found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is attached in the perineum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the secundina, extract it little by little, carefully so that the mother does not suffer violent traction. Make sure it is changed to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with straining and with the medication of the olla with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not tire over it in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is expelled from it to the mouth of the mother lies on the cushion of the woman, and then sterilize it with an enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it rot, then after a few days it will be dissolved and it will be expelled.
But when it may be possible, it is elevated bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and this is felt by the woman; and therefore it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to this.
But some of the Ancients already are reported sub-fumigation of nazitort and of dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menstruation and of the secundina:
It is made of wire or of brass.
And it is placed the subtle extremity in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside so that the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of the cure of the unperforated child's anus.
Many children are born and the anus of them is not perforated, which already has a subtle and opaque. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with her finger that opaque; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and guard that it does not touch the sphincter.
And then place on that wool soaked in wine and oil; and then cure it with an enguent until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is opaque, then place in the hole a pipe for many days, and remove it when the child will want to digest.
And already happens opacity of the anus by consolidation of plaque or of abscess; therefore, it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then it be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of the cure of fistulas that originate from below.
The fistulas that originate in the lower part of the anus are nodules and thickness which originate near the anus outside or in the space of one partition.
And it is a fistula or many.
And as that nodule is antiquated and flows from the humid whitish or subtle pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are recognized by what is expelled from them by the egress and by the windiness; and sometimes the woman of egress, and for them it is expelled from them worms.
And some of these fistulas sometimes enter the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the groin of the hip.
And in that which is known fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and try subtly with a thread or iron into the fistula when there is no turtuosity.
But if there is a turtuosity in that, then try subtly with lead or horsehair into it until you feel the thread or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor does it process from the tract any cause of stool or worms or flatulence, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you are free from the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the meaning of it is the excretion of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the groin and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread penetrates here if there is no turtuosity into the groin, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is a constant discharge; and that it does not help in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those fistulas penetrating there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the physicians upon which they are based.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already said and proven.
And it is that the patient lays between your hands on their two and raises their legs up, the thighs being inclined to the belly of them, and then try subtly with lead, or iron if there is turtuosity in the fistula, until you know the place where the thread penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that as you put your finger inside the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the thread already by itself penetrating, or another that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medication by which is expected benefit in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those skins adjusted to the fistula, that are like the quill of a bird's feather, are already charred.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until all those skins that are charred are covered, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by any other cure.
And if the thread enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the buttock, and between that and the thread which is veiled with skin or flesh, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the pudendum, then dry the pudendum from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the thread, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the thread reaches, and by the thread is liberated and catz.
And then purify those fistulaed skins which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not remain of those any cause.
But if flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you would insert those skins, then the best that is and of the pus lighter instrument is cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterize with fire adjusts good twice habits: it is the charring of those skins adjusted, and abscess of the blood excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in caus trissat until the place gets brace, and then cure the plague with enema flesh hard generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is styptic and excretion; when then it is restored it is already healed and you fear no iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the preon of the buttock and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the thread and between you and it is veiled with skin or flesh, and is prone to penetration, then there is no operation in it but according to your faith and of hope.
Which cause is to administer in it one of three ways: or that you cauterize that as we have said; or that you dry it until you achieve the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert the few and the proper cure; and do not process anything with incision so that you do not cut the lacert containing the buttock, and that happens on the patient excretion of his will; and then cure that with what we have said that is strong sir healing; or that you elongate that veiled and cleanse that pus that dries that within the buttock, as we have said, or with thread or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then purify those fistulaed skins which are in the incision within which you can with percrustation; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with incision, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus light through the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the anus, then take probe of perforated extremity, which is thus as needle of preparing the hearts according to this form:
And insert it into that faithful envelope of v fiels or around those; and then insert probe with faithful into the fistula until it can achieve the concavity of it.
But if it is penetrating in the edge of the anus near the end, then you extract the probe from that tract so that you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities at the same time, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when more deeply incides the probe in the flesh, tighten well that one while those flesh which are between the two extremities of the probe and which join.
And then cure the plague while it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make that penetrate, in whatever manner it is prepared for you, so that it is moved in the preon, because it is not to you that you do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then do it with that until it is healed.
The form of spatum spinos with which the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suturing hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two manners, because they are between the anus seeming like that of coals, or that those are like the fat of a raspberry. And of those are small and large, and that the blood flows from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however those that are outside the anus are according to the less moisture, of those which flow yellow water or a little blood with continuous body, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to express while the anus is open and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and then incisions those of their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those because of the moisture of them and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with fleece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then incisions those and pulverize over them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are applied to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey to egress, then christenize the patient with a cristeri in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and that obeys to egress lightly when the patient is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a hook, and incisions those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incisions, cover that you administer suture of them according to this manner: take a faithful envelope and insert it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelope the two extremities of the faithful in the part further from the needle, and so laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then remove the faithful and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of them untied, so that the superfluity of the blood flows from that one.
And then place on the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it dries; and when it is dried, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
And because they are old and are not effective in that medicine, then you cover those with the point of spatum or with your nail until they are made moist and is hosted by those the excess pus from below, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you remove those with a ration of pus vehement that the first one until it is bloody and is excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that almsamir, it is called, and it is not if not a knot round according to the color of the body resembling the head of a key, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and therefore by those pains the ailment.
And therefore, whoever is incised there, that is in the circuit of the key, and is held with the forceps or with an anchor, and is eradicated from its root; and then take care of that.
And if you want, cauterize the second one that is preceded in its chapter.
But of wart is a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and many times they come in the hands of children.
And the cure of it is that you extend and cut that, or you tighten that with a thread or with a thread inside that box. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
But the ant is a small, fetid or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body that goes into the skin, and when the ant finds that it is felt in it like a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is that you take a awl of eagle feather or of vulture feather, and it be strong, and you place that on the ant within that it contains the circle of the awl of the parts of it; and then you revolve your hand with the awl within that you cut that which is in the circuit of the ant, and you place that in the skin of the flesh, and that you eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you want, do that with an awl of iron or of steel according to this form:
Let the part above the awl be drawn to subtlety, deaf (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that over the said one the apprehension of it be ablated and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the ant according to what is said before in the cauterization of the boil in the chapter of cauteries.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christening is made of silver or of lead or of iron melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, that the one that is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are sore or painful, the christenings of those be small.
The form of a large and few christening:
The head of the awl of it above in which the bag is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it the distinction the one in which the bag is tied thus as sometimes.
And the extremity of it more below, the one which is inserted into the anus, be deaf (so it is not open) much lion, drawn to subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and in the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more thick a little.
And be the bag in which be placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of cru thread which be of ten threads, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, be tight in the head of the christening between two distinctions with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, that be scalded according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be supine on his back, and elevate his legs up and place below him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fennel or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that in this way, have the as much as it can; and if sleep with that for a whole night, it is more later in favor.
But if you cauterize that in the diseases of solution of belly and the evacuation of it the coyta, then you iterate the cautery until it be healed.
And if in the anus so hemorrhoids or abscesses leading, then be the christening much subtle and lion, of the christenings with which the children so christenized.
Of the cure of the plagues.
I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that which was convenient to the book, and I say thus the cure of those with my and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to that in which they are made the plagues and according to the place on which fall the plagues.
And the causes for which many times are made the plagues so as by the gash of a stone, or incision of a sword or of a dagger, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
May the plagues that are in the places of the body be as such as the plague that catches on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And you are recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule on the other plagues.
And you begin with the plagues of the head simple, because the remembrance of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or similar, and the vein has already been tightened only and it is a great plague and you fear about that patient having a boil, then you take care and immediately flebotomize the cephalic vein, and do not delay this; and extract from that of the blood according to the quantity of the virtue of it, if no other cause prohibits fleubotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the plague is little.
And let the fleubotomy be on the opposite side of the afflicted part; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from coarse foods.
But if for any reason fleubotomy is prohibited, then let the food be diminished and do not approach meat or wine.
And place on the plague, if a boil occurs, a cloth infused in rose oil or in wine in which is steeped.
But if it is certain of a boil, then place on the plague, if it is recent, its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recount shortly.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on the plague, until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or is due to a cut of space and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by sutures, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recount of the sutures of them.
But if the plague is already uncovered from the bone and skin, and it is not a retention of it but a small suspender, then incise it and then treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh near the vein, and command the patient to be sparing of foods in which there is grease: caps and forms, cooked and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if something putrefies in the vein and does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all of it and throw it out, and then treat it.
But if in these plagues is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood can come, and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or burn it; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is severed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in this way that you pulverize on those this powder, because consolidated that before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: receive olive oil, one part, of dragon's blood, two parts, of caus no-extinct, three parts; be all ground and sifted, and of it be the plague filled, and be constricted by good constriction until well upon it adheres, and be coagulated with the blood.
And then strengthens that with poultices and leave it, and do not untie it while it is thus that it is not festered, because no medicine is eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do this alone caut, when it is not to you in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it convenes that it be placed upon them and be tightened, and are recent plagues with their blood, the ones which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and mostly when it is in summertime, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather treat those with what we have said, in this way that you place on those poultices digestible, or that you place on those dust of the barley flour with water and honey until they get a poultice; and then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if a fracture occurs with the plague in bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a gesti.
And I say the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or artery, then if it is a nerve, do not engage in it but that its cure be avoided with what makes vehement stipitcity, such as zinc and zegi that is vitriol and similar to them because they are noxious to the nerves and counteract it. And do not place on the plague any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if it is cured with medicines light, such as is washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose or un-rose oil, and threshed when it is washed with sweet water and the other herbs minced according to this manner, and humid poultices.
But if the wound is large, then administer sutures, or narrow the lips of it, and then care for it with poultices until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or an accident occurs in it to the lower part of the body, then perforate that in the most depressed location.
But if in the wound an artery is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary to stop the bleeding.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of them are already incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; raise that and reduce it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for a few days; and then care for that with poultices in which there is styptication and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound already in the bone has been made a fracture, then strike that, and if in it there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can of them; and what to you is not apparelled, leave that within the wound until it is possible to separate it, and the discharge from it is relieved.
And if the wound is recent then pulverize over that powder which is recommended to you. But if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure that with water of which the remembrance will come in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the wound there is windiness when the patient groans; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that it is not the blood retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it suffocates the patient, but place in it an attractive poultice, and untie that twice a day.
And if the poultice is not to you present, then you place in the orifice of the wound a piece of old cloth so that it sucks what there is of the humidities; and make the patient sleep upon the wound so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
But if from the wound have passed three days or more and there does not occur to the patient spasm nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the ale, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the wound is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already is made a fistula; cure therefore that by its chapter.
And if the wound is by incision of a spade or of a knife, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with water that is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already has been made a fracture in the bone, and already of it are incised pieces, then you turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them within until the wound is possible to separate, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other wounds accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of water that we have said.
Of the Wounds of the Belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or little, or medium.
And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and if it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, because it opens and is thickened for which the entrance into it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that convenience in sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate to the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is issued some cause of the intestine through that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then that is in one of two manners: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the intestine has come inflammation because of the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then that you cover that as you would submerge a sponge or cloth damp in water, tepid alone, or that you boil in water squinting, and cyperum, and spice, and embroider with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes this is done with a decoction, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which are boiled elder and mallows, because by this it is relieved inside with little cause.
But if the intestine is irritated by this cure, then you divide the disruption a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is owned that it is not a section, and that there is no occupation to dry it up when there is need and weakness.
Of the instrument, this is the shape of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is fine, and not with the fineness of a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
And therefore, when the plague is amplified and the intestine is pushed out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the shape of its natural one, in its proper place, if it is possible, because it is better.
But when the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you place the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and consideration always in that way so that the part in which the plague is is higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in large and in small plagues.
And in small plagues, place that which is prepared by you, and make it be administered between your middle fingers, the one which has the disruption entirely with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which has the suture for any other cause.
And this is the common way of suturing: one that takes the needle, or a count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then lays it from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthens the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the cap that is left the cord of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the cap, and four orders are made.
And then strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts at once, and then add the two lips and the plague by decent addition; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire constriction of the plague.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and fineness, because the fine needles slightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter into the cord, and therefore for that reason they must be medium in fineness and thickness.
And do not let the needle be fixed in two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not slightly incised and that the plague is healed before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in suturing so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient's sleep; and place on the suture powders expanded from all parts, the ones which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with needles in this way is most convenient in small plagues, because it is enough in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the cap, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in fineness and thickness.
And when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part from which you commenced, so that the thread is retracted from the highest part to the plague, so that the suturing is according to the suturing of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suturing is good for men.
And with this suturing I cured the plague which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the plague was greater than a palm, and it was pushed out of the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced it after that the bowel had been pierced by the plague for twenty-four hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and I cured him and he is healed; and this I have seen for many years, and it is converted in its dispositions.
And the other physicians had judged that it would not be cured; and by miracle fire, because I did not cure that wound with an enguent, because it was in a place where enguent was not found nor any medicine, but I placed over the plague a hot cloth two times a day and assiduous washing with honey water until fire healed.
But I say two kinds of suture proper according to the narration of Word.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore as the needle penetrates the tendon and in that middle laceration according to rectum and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the chiphac in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the body.
And therefore as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the body from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the chiphac that is in this place, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make penetrate with that one your penetration with which you make that penetration in the chiphac in the extremity of the mirror which is in that part while all that penetrates.
And then, beginning from this same side, sew with the extremity that is of the chiphac in the other place, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that tendon and body the extremity of the chiphac that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and extract that one from the tendon which is of that part.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time then another until you sew all that which is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellicies with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the chiphac one time from the part of the extremity of the tendon, and that you leave that other time within while you have completed it.
But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of its own and by it recommended, is that you sew that one according to similarity with which some medicants sew that one, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to that which I to you recommend.
Because that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror to your proper side from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the chiphac; and then turn the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the chiphac.
And then turn those each one, and make penetrate each one from the back part into the front part in two extremities of the mirror others that are in the contrary place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is suture of which I preceded remembrance.
This is the sermon of Gualia.
And yet some, they said, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these each one a thread, and begin with introduction of needle of that which you owe, and make that penetration into the other side according to suture of those which sew the hides equally.
And know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medication of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you cleanse the plague recent with its blood before the air alters that one, and reduce the intestine and sew that one and prepare that one decently, then it rests upon that earthy powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then it rests upon that some enguents which are to your presence while they make hard and join the threads, and be consolidated chiphac and mirror; and then cure that thus as is the cure of the other plagues while it be healed.
But if to you are not present the medicines, then it rests upon that soon, because it begins to throw brac, hot cloth, and changes that two times a day, thus as to you and I taught, while it be healed, because you do not indigested of other medication in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates in lesion to the principal members, then it is that you submerge linen lion in oil of good quality, or in rubbed oil, and place that one in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the aysselas.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in its bowels, because many times that one must, then christenize that with vi stiptic black tebe, and mostly if the poyredura is arrived in the bowel and is made exitura penetrating into the concavity of it.
And know that that one which is of the thick bowel is of pus lighter healing than that one which is in the subtle bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the hernia, which is called “gegunu,” does not receive healing from the plague that is in it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of those that are in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your recipe with which you reduce the hernias equally.
But if it has passed into that space and has already become green or black, then you should strengthen that with a file on the place that is discolored from it, so that blood flows, because in the fabric are veins and arteries.
And then cut into that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file hanging from the part where the plague has been cut out, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must the cutting of the fabric and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Memorization of the plagues when they occur in the hernia.
When a rupture occurs in the hernia and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because for this I saw one who had been plagued in his belly by a lance blow and it was the hernia on the right side of the stomach, and the hernia was old and made a fistula, and it was easy for him to manage and vent.
Therefore, I thought about the cure of him, since it was not confused in the healing of him, but I continued to subtly treat him until the inside was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should avoid any accident of evil in his belly; and he did not become ill because of that evil accident and he returned to his usual ways of eating and drinking, and then I put him in a bath and he was exercised in his legs.
And already some experienced ones have said that when a hernia occurs in the belly, and it is small, then it is necessary that it be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take some large-headed pins; and then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place a pin of those that has the mouth open on the two lips of the hernia; therefore, when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another pin next to the first one, and do not cease this to do with pins one next to another according to the quantity of the whole hernia.
And then reduce that and the hernia; and those annexed heads remain in the belly until the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is already possible that the hernia be tied with a subtle file which is made of the skin of an animal annexed to it, because it is more like a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of those files of skin, and it is well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a file of iron, enveloped, and then introduce that file into needles and sew with it the hernia, and reduce that in the rupture.
And this manner of suturing with pins is nothing but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle hernias, because then it is not engendered but subtlety, and it is not healed of it at all.
Of the cure of zoster and fistula.
Know that every hernia and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and it is made into an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and throws out a discharge all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula and we call that one zoster.
And a fistula according to truth is a tough, white, and hard nodule, with which there is no pain and which has a concavity as is the concavity of a bird's beak; and for this reason, that one is called by some rizatz, that is, beak.
And it is in some people humid, which throws out discharge; and very quickly the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And I want to tell you as I do to know the cure of fistula which is done by the way of operation with a knife.
And know that fistulas occur in all the limbs of the body; for some of these are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed by composition as such that from the hand and foot; and these are those that give to it proximity of the principal member and of likenesses.
And therefore of these fistulas that are in this manner are those of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with that is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach these places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a tentative of iron or of fire, and if the fistula goes according to the rectum, and you inquire that with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a tentative of subtle lead, for lead with the lightness of its body is alleviated and curved of the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having moist horrors, it is not to you possible that you signify over it with a tentative.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, for the humidity by which you cleanse that goes away from the other orifices and runs from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible to you that you know if here has os or the nerve, and is the cavity of the fistula distant or proximate, or is a fistula to which there are horrible orifices and this over all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you owe the compression with your hand over the place, and likenesses of the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And cum you will have stood over all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is fistula apparent proximate or in salt place, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which you and say.
Then you dry the fistula according to that which was said before of the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of theil and of likenesses, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is according to the rectum, then cover that which you incised in the preon as much as to you is possible, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with that some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore that with poultices which engender healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize that according to that which we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it behooves you to certify that, then you inquire into that and dry that according to that which we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you root that until the corruption is hosted entirely; and then cure that with that which it incarnates until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and yields brac as it was doing, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and then you uncover over it secondarily and exquisitely do the root and the purification of it with the latter strong hold of your, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is it; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not succeeded, and therefore to you in that there is generated but to leave that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to throw that, then you throw it with subtle forceps which are convenient to that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those leave none cause with your strength.
But if to you make contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation of removing the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that which you can plaster that, and leave that until that is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plague that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
Having, if you fear, pause over it a poultice submerged in sopre trissat with oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green poultices, for when they will have plasters those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those traction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that with a razor only as far as the blackness and corruption remain, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut into the area where the corruption has reached, and then cure it inside until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you have a man in the patient's thigh so that you place that as an example and assistant over your operation.
Be a young man around thirty years old, who has an accident in his thigh, and from the parts of his body, the evil is on the matter of the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not caused by an external cause.
And therefore be extended the time with that by the error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and there come out many materials from it, and its cure is then stopped until the thigh is fistulated, and there are made in it many orifices which all throw out pus and the humors of the body.
And therefore the cure took many months of doctors around two years, and I was not in those wise but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that flowed from him through those orifices for a great course; and already the body of that man was all debilitated and the color of him was yellowish.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone with the probe.
And then I and carefully examined all the orifices and found that they reached to all parts of the thigh.
And then I myself took a knife and cut into one of the orifices where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed what to me was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and uncovered over the bone secondarily over the first uncovering, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sewed what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made a fair cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I uncovered it another time and did not cease to cut into the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I cut into it around one palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation on him and the section of it except for the disposition of the frailty of him and for the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, for he suffered at all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore he healed is by whole healing, and nothing is in the place of bone, hard flesh; and it was made good the disposition of him in his body and returned the virtue of him; and he was converted in his dispositions and did not make him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already drawn, then when you cut it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command someone to extend it upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that on the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, for when you do this it is not forbidden the saw that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cover that it be the sawing over the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force to sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, and it is one part continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts altogether; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continuous from the other part.
And if from the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in him reason but ingenuity.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, since you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to whatever disposition which is possible to you, and in each case make it rectified to you, when it does not cause you contrariety of vein or nerve.
And you should know which are the saws and the instruments to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that whenever you prepare for every kind of operation, the instrument convenient to that operation.
And you should know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which you indigeysses; when you are great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of diseases, for that whenever you have already by yourself that which is convenient to them of the instruments to every disease.
And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments the ones which you will place as simple with the ones with which you will proceed to your prohibition the one which you will experiment upon the others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient otherwise than that with that [the chisel] the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw decently made: it should be made with an arc of it as high as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a boy's dagger decently made. Form of it:
Form of a razor which has a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor of curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a chisel which is convenient to the ratio of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of a sharp extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
The extremities can be either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike any cause, then whenever you cut that member into that which the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cooked that fire has already burned it, or it can be brought near the blackness before the poultice that one puts into that member that it sees it and that it nourishes the whole body; and therefore, you take care to cut into that.
And similarly if it is cause of the corruption by percussion of some venomous causes as such as from a scorpion of the sea or from a viper or from a rutabaga and of similar things.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
And similarly if it comes to the hand, then you cut it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it nourishes in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if instead of that, the corruption passes and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption envezeys the toe of the foot, then you cut it into one of the joints.
And if it takes in the heel of the foot, then you cut the whole foot. But if it reaches into the thigh, then you cut the thigh into the joint of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no other than dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of cutting or sawing the member is that you tighten the ligament in the part furthest down which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the spot; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, a little flat, so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then cut or saw it.
And cover that it be placed cloth of all parts so that it does not touch the place, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if blood flows when working, then you cauterize the place carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a convenient bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is when a blackness occurs in his foot with a burning that was assembled like a fire's combustion.
And that corruption happens first in his toe before it spreads throughout the whole foot.
And therefore that man prepares himself to put on the pus that he sees the cure going to the member with the vehemence of it that it throbs with pain and burning, and the insidious foot enters the joint, and fire heals.
Long time happens to it that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And therefore it comes to me, and so I am perforated to return that superfluity with that which I place on the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of him; and no is returned the superfluity and it begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he begged me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that, hoping for the return of that superfluity, and more than that, I feared the incision of his hand would be death, because the virtue of the patient was over coming.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it reached me that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it may be helpful about what happens to this disease, and that its meaning by which it is signified and according to which it is treated.
Of cure of the intestines and quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and pus is ejected from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it as if it were a fine cloth, and no further corruption has reached it, and no imprint has been made on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as if it were turned, and mostly when it is fine and made like cloth, and cauterized so that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that that corruption has not achieved further consequence, and in the skin there has been a passage of pus, then you cure it with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of fetid odor, then you clysterize it with the Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sweet wine and ziniar receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ash, when this medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of beech, and put water on it; and then collect that and clysterize with it until you are convinced that the sinus is now healed.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then clysterize it with water and honey and what is mixed with crushed ziniar, and clysterize it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you are convinced that the sinus is now healed, then clysterize it with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of the dyacinon enguent and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize it with some medicines and other enguents that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of the enguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian enguent or basilicon enguent until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave of it the quantity in which between the clyster there is addition.
And if the patient's orifice, from which the arm protrudes, is raised to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in him so that the arm may run into below, because when the arm is contracted in the prepondency of the sinew, the flesh is engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew inside the environment of the lowest bone according to your will, then perforate it so that you prepare the limb with the preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is to your apparel and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
But that which is over the orifice of the sinew, the which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what runs from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And in this way you consider the place of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is cast upon the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or approximates adherence, then you may it the third day, and when you untie the poultice, then change the cloth for another and renew the enguent.
But if from the sinew a little space away there appears a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it approaches, because so in some men in whom the slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those in whom the contrary of it is done.
And if from the sinew after many days a digested arm is issued, then you know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphicon enguent, when in it there is adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last of these which is cured, is that you take of diaphicon enguent and be dissolved in rose oil, and on it be poured vi antic in its substance, and then combine this with it, and use of this.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphicon enguent, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind all and pulverize over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it on cloth and stretch this over the sinew; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize over cloth and stretch this.
And sometimes are administered with it aristolochia longua and roots of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of errs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and pulverize over the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panari, and nails rubbed and finger incision added and section.
A panaricium is an abscess which arises from beneath the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and often arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less esteemed, or is an abscess of an abscess caut, or is corrupted, and casts arm until it corrodes the roots of the nail, and often corrupts all of it, and often spreads its corruption to the bone until it is a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made livid, and the color of it is made dusky.
And therefore when you will have this with what we have said in the division and do not combine your cure, then cove that you cut with iron all the superfluity that is remained of the nail and then cauterize the wound with it, because cauterization is very helpful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the parts of the finger, and begin to prick it and let it out, then cove that you place a fine ray beneath the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and impel it upwards and cut it with ease, and place over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines comburent corrosive until it be all removed; and then cure this with enguents until it be healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cove that you cut the bone and extract it, for no time is it healed that is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed the memory, and then care for it while it is healing.
But if the nail is struck or rubbed, and there is pain in that area, then when you first begin to treat the patient, you dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, and guard yourself that the section does not reach into the flesh that is left of the nail, because you will cause the patient great pain, and it will cause the birth of superfluous flesh in the area; and then care for that place with water that will ease the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very hard all over, and it is very hard in the bones, or very hard in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some of the nuts of the hands. But the one that is born in some of the nuts of the finger does not get bad, and the one that is born in the joints is very bad.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that is what you cut with a wide spatula at the root of it.
But the one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
But in the one that is born in the finger, when you begin to cut the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws convenient for water, and then care for it while it is healing.
But consolidation, which happens to the fingers between their many movements or by birth of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by similar things, then you must remove that consolidation while the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between their cloths of the infused in oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead while it is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the member.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins wrapped thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the major arrival of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, you must administer purging of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two ways: one is that it is incised and that black blood is thrown out, and the other way is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this way: embroil at the beginning the leg with warm water so that the thick blood is resolved, which is foul from the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the groin into the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in a place, or in two, or in three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg into up, and down, until the amount of blood that you want and that seems sufficient is extracted, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then apply that, and command him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this way: you who raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with warm water until it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present to you, until the limb is scalded.
And then cut the vein on the right side of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it below the knee, or in the lowest part of it below the ankle.
And then open the vein with tweezers and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it is the appearance of it that sometimes that black color declines.
And therefore, when you evacuate and from the vein, you sometimes see that white cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it is elevated and thrown from the vein, and suspend that with an onion or a lion's horn.
And then cut another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then excoriate the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut that in the back incision below the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is extracted through the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, until all is extracted; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey to your command to extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and extract it, or introduce it behind it the ray and turn your hand to all parts within which it is thrown. And be careful that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it is made difficult to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient for that harm.
And when that whole aura is thrown out, then place on the location of the plague wool immersed in wine and oil, both rubbed and unrubbed, and cure it while it is inside.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in its wrapping in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then cover that on all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks while you elevate that whole thing.
And guard yourself that your section does not cut the vein and that you do not harm that, because it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incident with the which is dried vein:
It is not to it acute as with the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility lion, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is engendered in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there is no grass nor aybre.
And very much it is engendered in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom from the intestines of the body serpents and worms and scarides and worms engendering between the bone and the flesh.
And sign of the reception of the advent of it is of this vein that accides in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the location is vesicated; and then it begins the vein to issue from the location of that vesication which seems rooted from a plant.
And therefore, when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap over that a piece of lead of which be the weight of a dragon. Within two dragons, and no that and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as it appears of it any cause to the parts outside, bandage that with lead and bandage that. And if the part is prolonged, then you should cut a part of it and bandage the remnant; and do not cut that which is rooted until it is outside, because if you cut that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes an abscess and puss to occur in the location and a bad ulceration.
Because it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it is thrown out from the end of it and no remnant of it remains in the body.
And from this vein is issued in some men that is in its length of five palms and ten, and already it has come to me that it is issued one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforate that with a long tract with the body, until it is evacuated all that which is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the location for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and vein to it many orifices, and it is issued from some orifice ramp.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with what is said below.
Of section above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine pain.
This malady is called in some lands as the malady bovine because it often happens to oxen and it is worm few one of which is born between the bone and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its increase from limb to limb until it disrupts the bone and appears outside.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if it were worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and has arrived at the brain, then very much it weeps in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then you must tighten what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then dry above it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and not the other, then you must pause cauterizing with fire on the location until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the location as we have said.
If you see that being reached to the top of the head, then tighten over the forehead with a strong constriction, and then squeeze it, and extract it; and since the patient uses modifications of his body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
On the section above the ailment of nafir.
This ailment is called nafir in our land, and it is pain which comes in certain limbs, and then it is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was romped for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was pushing it along, but more lightly than being alive, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it went into the pain of that place and it settled in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to me that I should turn myself over the whole body of her according to what I saw; and I was too amazed by the permutation of it and the speed of limb to limb. And I had already seen this before in my own patients in this manner, however, I have seen many who feel pain being changed from limb to limb. But I did not see this in the patients as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be anything but that because the woman was old, one whose body was dry and whose veins were exposed, and in this appearance, that windiness was perceived.
And it is necessary that it does not appear in this way in those who are delicate and with moist bodies and veins well-covered.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you at the head as we have said, then you tighten over it and leave it slightly and squeeze it until that windiness is constricted, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see it in your patients' heads, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with what you expel windiness, and you charm them with pills that smell bad and with pills of serapi and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large tips, and small, and concave, and blunt, some are solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some have shafts.
And of the signs of the neck is when it lodges in it an arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it is expelled from the cyphasis, which is above the brain, for it happens through it a violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roar in the limbs, and inflammation and roar of the tongue, and spasms and mixing of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very much the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and it is expelled from the place of the wound a white humidity resembling powder, and tears from it resembling the whiteness of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not going to be fatal.
But the signs of the arrow when it lodges in the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and it is felt with that which it has been lodged in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very much the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the flow of the wound is black blood, and it feels that coldness of the extremities, and a sudden chill, and syncope; and therefore you know that death descends upon it all at once.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are so that there is much blood and spittle from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and he expires with great spirit and demands the attraction of cold air.
And if the arrow lodges in the ligament which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small of the back, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and sighing, and it does not hurt all the limbs of the muscles.
And if the arrow lodges in the stomach, then very much there are tears from the wound and some undigested food.
And if the arrow lodges in the belly, and it is lodged in it, there are tears from the wound, or the membrane, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and it is expelled outside urine, and it is processed from it some cause to the parts outside, and it is very painful on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
But the other members as well as the face, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders and arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their likenesses of the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount this to you that I have seen of the being of these arrows, so that you may signify by this about your cure.
The cause is, because in a man shot an arrow in the lacrimal of his eye in the root of the nose, and you extracted that from him from the other part, leaving the gray of the eyelid of him, and he is healed, and it did not happen in the eye of him harm.
And extracted another arrow from a Jew who shot him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and was not obtained from it except a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's iron in which there were no eyelids.
And healed the Jew, and it did not happen in his eye any harm.
And extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has eyelids; and therefore I incised upon that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the throat of him; and then I subtiliated with it, and then I extracted it, and he healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, because for thirty days had passed and there was no change in him from his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and engineered upon it, and he healed, and it did not happen to him any harm.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot in his back, and consolidated is the plague upon him, and because for about seven years, he extracted the arrow in the root of the hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her belly, and the plague is consolidated from within her, and it was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and consolidated is the plague and it broke the arrow, not finding much pain here, and many appearances had this one.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was shot in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and it was hidden all the arrow.
And I was called to his cure after the shooting of the arrow entered within three days.
And then I felt the plague of the arrow very strictly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle attempt, and I did not feel it; but I felt it prick below the right eyelid, and then I suspected that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster in which is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place was to be apostatized so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it would dry over it.
And it did not happen in the place any accident significant that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and it did not happen any accident; and consolidated is the plague meanwhile, and it broke the pain of the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed upon the plague medicine acute corrosive for many days until it was opened, and with the attempt I felt it, and I felt the extremity of the arrow subtle, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted in the appearance of the plague by that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and passed to me time with it for the space of time within four months.
And then because the plague was amplified, and it was possible to me to intervene with the forceps in it, and remove it, and not obliged to this, then I did not cease to subtilize and engineer upon it with manners of ingenuity, until one day upon it with manners of ingenious I began to hang it with forceps gently made, according to how it will come the form of them at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that plague.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the plague is consolidated, and healed is the patient completely healthy, and it did not happen to him in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended with the narration nor comprehend them the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument deserves the descent of the foreign causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not thrown out of the limbs in which they are lodged, but in two ways: either by traction of the place in which they are lodged; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that one which is thrown out by the place in which it is lodged, or the arrow proceeds in fleshy place, and is thrown and thrown out.
And if it does not obey the easement of the hour in which it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it can heal, and the traction of it and its exit are relieved.
And similarly if it is lodged in bones and does not obey your easement, then leave that one for some days and repeat that with traction and movement every day, and it will be thrown out.
And if it does not obey your easement after some days, then you must bore into the circuit of the arrow in that bone from every part with a fine drill until the place of the arrow is amplified, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire that one with a probe, and if you feel that one, then pull that one with some instruments which are convenient for its traction.
And if you cannot over it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the arrow, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut on the plague until it is amplified and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears in which it is held, then you cut the flesh in which it is lodged from every part with all the force that you can do; and devise over that, if you cannot over the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with the twist of your hand with forceps in all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly with subtle dexterity that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult extraction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot over that of your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can heal, and then repeat that because then it is relieved. But if to you makes contrariety flux of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer force in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I have recounted to you.
And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should the placement of the arrow in it, for it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible by the figures.
But the arrows that are thrown out by the contrary of the other part, or which have already from it proceeded some part to the parts outside, or make difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut over that; and be the section according to the quantity in which they grip the forceps; and then pull that, because it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then repeat that until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a curved instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is envenomed, then you must excavate all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then cure that with that which convenes.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is close so that you touch it with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut over it, then cut over it and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are attached:
Let the extremities of them be like the beak of a bird that are made like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these many kinds are made, large, few, and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
As a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two bones that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; For of those there is one cephalica, and it is the wild vein; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, deaf, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalica; and that name the people “vein of the whole body”, and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic vein, and is named “citillar”, and the vulgars name that “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it is placed on the focil, and it is that in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that which appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild vein; and the second is sophena, and the location of it is below the leg of the domestic vein; and the sciatic vein, and the location of it is below the leg of the wild vein; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The use of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and emigranea and sahafati and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be shaved the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput in the location of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the locations of them near the ears in two depressed locations of the head; and try that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the attempt.
Then you take the sharp lance, and that is the incident one, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you elevate your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it as much blood as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has been preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the use of phlebotomy is for ancient emigranea and evil and obstinate ophthalmia and courses of acute superfluities effused to the bones.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck tightly until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and the pulse of them below your finger is demonstrated; and then you try it.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicating, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place on that a poultice and tighten it above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already has been preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the use of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalica for ancient ailments of the face and for emigranea and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to what I recommend to you; so it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pause the point which is at the head of the lancet on that vein and strike upon it with a pen or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and tighten that until it is healed.
And some times it is opened with a lancet, but however the lancet should not be of acute extremity as the other lancets, rather it should be of blunt extremity, and lancet it according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong that it would break it with the lancet when it is subtle.
But the benefit of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of the two heels by scabies of the heels by rheum and sebum in the heels, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then lancet those, and you being standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse in longitude a little with lancet a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the lancet is subtle, very likely the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause upon those coats, and tighten those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to vehement soda, and to the diseases of the face and emigranea and rheum that accidies in the face, and more when it is ancient.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet subtle long and place it in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you ultimes your hand with the lancet little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the two guides is to constriction of ale and to beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and inpetige and bad ulcerations corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens behind each one in his neck with a bandage; and the artificers are over the head of the patient, and the patient is sitting on a stool.
And then lancet the vein at the long with lancet ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what times of necessity that is ad to what; and then make semblant of the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and tighten the two veins with a medium stricture so that the patient is not prefocated, and leave it until the morning when the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the veins algerich, conferreys to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcerations and fissures, and to bad ulcerations that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tighten the neck of him with a bandage, and then you turn the lips of him and regard the two veins of which one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this more is because in the circuit of those so veins small black; and therefore you inscise each one by incision inscident.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which of those is, then you understand the incision of the major of those, and of the pus manifest of those.
And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the benefit is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to prefocacios that are in the guolayro, to the malady of the uvula, and to maladies of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, from one side of it vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore lancet each one; and guard yourself that you do not ultimes your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those so arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those that corr custom in all the men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the lancet mirtilat or olive to subtility declining; or secsar with lancet cutellar, and calls it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the latz of him be so as times, and it is required to open the concave veins full procedentz apparents grossas, and to those that contain thick blood turbed.
And this flebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and it is required to flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle blood citri.
But the benefit of the flebotomy of the basilica vein which is one of three veins: that which extrates the blood of the maladies that are left the guolayro and the col, and of that which is left the feet and the belly.
And it is required of the flebotomist, when flebotomy that, that guard well that and be over-fear in that, for that left that artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will inscidir that artery and will accidira flux of blood, for so that cove that no flebotomies that with flebotomy pungent, abantz be sectant with skill.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then cove that you leave that and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that flebotomy in place of it end of the arm, for that is manifest; and secsa that with flebotomy skill as we have said.
But if you want the flebotomy of it metyssa, then cove before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place within that you know the place of the wrists, and then she on it with a tench; and then lie the arm and secsa the vein with concave section with flebotomy skill as we have said; and guard you that cage the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as strengthens the ligament, inflation in the place that you have senhat with a tench, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore squiva that.
And if you see the blood flow in the flebotomy as such as gold of child, and the blood is subtle rog, then sapias that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you coyta and pause your dit on that for long space; and then oppose your dit, and if the blood is abscindit, for many times it is abscindit, then you strenh the arm and layssa that.
And guard the patient from the moccio of him, and be over-fear of him and no maugua that for some days within that he be sanat.
But if the blood is not abscindit, and you see that you no es present medicina to that, then you inscideys the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contrayta, and is abscindit the blood; or that prenguas scorsa of fistic, and fen that, and pren the one maytat and strenh that on the place of the vein am strictura descent am liament and am pulvils entro the other day.
And then if the blood is abscindit, bo es; and if not, then cura that with that of which it is precedit to the rememoracio of the place of the polveras abscindentz flux of blood.
And the abscision of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the vena fusca the flebotomy is juvament that extrates the blood of the superior part of the head and to the part below the body; for that it is composed of branch of the basilica and of branch of cephalica, as we have said.
And cove to the fleubotomant that be over-fear in the flebotomy of it, for that left that is a nerve; and therefore if it adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy and atroba the nerve, accidira to it stupor, and is difficult the sanacio of it, and fort leu no es sanat of all, And this nerve many times appears to the sentiment; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and is not shown, then cove that you pause the flebotomy with the one with which you flebotomy with section of skill, and avoids the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you fen the vein in the longitut.
The juvament of the flebotomy of the vena cephalica is that atratz the blood of the head and comfereys to the maladies of the heels.
And cove in this properly, if you want that the flebotomy pungen with flebotomy olive or with flebotomy myrtle; for it is the pus salva of all the veins, for it is not below it artery nor nerve.
But however fort leu is apostemat in some men, when it is not fleubotomat in the primieyra percussio, but not notz in re that apostema.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and for the hope of it and the precaution of the advent of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be performed in one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and that phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near eating, when there appear signs of repletion.
And it should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that has passed three hours of the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And you must that a child not be phlebotomized until they have reached fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant not be phlebotomized until the fourth month into the seventh, and the elderly not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And as if anyone wants to be phlebotomized by any manner, you must that they purify their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's enema, if in those there is a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not throw the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And they should not be phlebotomized patients nauseous, excessively full of food, or suffering from disease or drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor those suffering from dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, near vomiting, near a distended abdomen, and near multiplication of work and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils, and of every cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporal or animal.
And before it, consider in the subtility of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And before it, enter in a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by some exercise so that the blood is subtiliated.
And pause the phlebotomy of it in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforsa that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as is labor and superfluous pain and work and semblance to them.
And to his bed, have them present the causes in the use of which custom of men with aromatics and scents and with balsams and similitudes to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist upon a cushion that is softer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And before it, extract his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and before it, strengthen the ligament with a strip and wrap that two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for if the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with softening, and then prohibit the body of the blood's ascent.
And before the stricture, you must that the one who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together while the veins are inflamed and declared to the touch.
And before the phlebotomist, anoint his phlebotomy with a little bit of olive oil properly; and before it, pause his left hand's index finger on that vein, below the location of which the phlebotomy is desired, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is seated for as the veins are the one that atrophies as if the heart fled, and those are that are full of wind and when you pause the phlebotomy on that one it is contracted, and it is discovered the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is straitened.
And therefore, for this, you must that the phlebotomist be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And before the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one attempt, then it is good; and if not, then you iterate it another attempt below that location a little, or upon it with a festinacio, if the location is not apostate.
And if the location is apostate, or the patient is scared, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for it will strongly pull the cautery apostate, nor enter into a bath.
And before it, iterate the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the aperture is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the aperture a little, and do it with festinacio before the location is apostate, for the location is apostate in many men of little aperture.
But if sometimes that one is already apostate, then you do not iterate upon it, for it excuses you no cause; and pause upon it some part of the wound of oil, for it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer a fenestration of oil in every phlebotomy with which you make incisions in the veins, prohibiting the flow of blood from the body, and do this with a tyria of alfac and sage when it is placed on the area, because the blood is refined and revolts when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which often happens, and mostly to those who have not been bled but only that time, or at the opening of the vein, little, then you cover it, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that you do this near the insertion of the blood from that vein with the completion of it or of another vein.
And if there remains in the area for some days some blackness or greenness, do not worry about it; and if you want, place on it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calamine or similar to it.
And many times abscesses and prominences occur after phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness under your compression, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you place on it any cause of what has been said, because it is likely to flow from the artery blood.
And make a poultice with water in which is styptic, so that the place may endure, and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color of the vein over the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it issue until it is ropy; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it issue until it is refined; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in one who is frail, let the contrary of that be done, and cover that you extract that in troops of times, and that the tract be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, and cover that you care for that before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from the one blood in three times or four.
And if it is a coldness of complexion, then prepare before the phlebotomy a poultice soaked in myrrh syrup or in honey syrup aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in syrup aromatized and much fragrant.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of much blood, then cover that you prepare in drinking water of meat and syrup much fragrant subtle; and use of aromatics with algualea, and let the patient's feet be rubbed with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood according to time, cover that to him of whom the phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But he who wants to evacuate his arm, and take out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to throw the blood from his body to the opposite side from which it declines, cover that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be taken out of it blood in one time and that a great quantity be thrown out and that the opening be amplified until syncope occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of him of the blood, so that it does not die in place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And cover that when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the emission of the blood, that you press on it with violence and bend it slightly, because this is too bad.
Have the patient lie down while it is being phlebotomized secondarily; or remove this with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on it a tyria of alfac or sage, and compress this with lighter compression until the blood is out.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave that and do not touch it until the suppuration is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood, and there is no excuse, then bleed him in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "artery of the arm" is flebitized in the place of the basilica or of the ulnar, when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient inserts his hand into cold water until the phlebotomy site reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then tie tightly above that limb with a stricture; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to the length.
And be the incision wide and be your phlebotomy with the one which you phlebotomize on the junction of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of the hand in the cold water, and the mess is placed the body of blood in cold water in time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it leaves it without a pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you tie the hand with a ligature or with your hand, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated at the sight; and then phlebotomize that transversely; and if it incisions that of all, do not touch it in return.
And conserve that you do not end your hand with the phlebotomy, because from it are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in it, because if you do not repeat it in the cold water, the blood coagulates in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And since it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be consolidated tightly; and similarly, as you would do in every straight vein.
But the usefulness of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is convenient for the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you have done in the other.
And the usefulness of the saphenous vein of the phlebotomy is to the diseases that are in the part below the body, as well as diseases of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and arms old, and to their likeness of the diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient inserts his foot in cold water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear well; and lie upon the junction of the foot with a band; and the place of the vein the talon appears, and from that, it is branched in the surface of the foot, many ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest branch or below the calf of the talon of the addition of it, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize it on the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one which you would phlebotomize by the transverse, as if you wanted to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy skillful.
But if the emission of blood is prohibited; then you repeat the foot of him in the cold water and let the blood run in it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy on top a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear of it malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the left side.
And the usefulness of the phlebotomy of it is to the pain of the hip when it is by blood caught.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters in bath, and fastens and strengthens the thigh of him from the side of the wide inside below the heel below four fingers in a long and subtle band, so that it appears not by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize it according to each skill that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it by incision or cut it by section, because the place of it is safe.
And it is in many men well-known; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and it is the one that appears in the back of the foot in front of the auricular and annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make the blood flow in the quantity that you want.
Then untie the stricture and place over the location of the phlebotomy cut and tighten the area, for it is slightly healed.
Of ventosa and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas are of horns, or of glass, or of wood.
And ventosa is made in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosa without scarification.
And this ventosa that is without scarification is in two ways, for it is with fire or without fire.
And to the ventosa that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which ventosa is placed is alnocrati, and it is the rear part of the head; and the middle location of the two parts of the neck together; and ventosa of the chin below the mandible further from the mouth; and ventosa of two spatulas; and ventosa of alohoster, and it is above the end of the rib; and ventosa of two focils, and it is of two arms; and ventosa of two cavities; and ventosa of two thighs.
And ventosa does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture the virtue through those, as it is captured by phlebotomy; nor does it cover that ventosa should be made with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventosa for illness or for continuity, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time that is.
And therefore when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventosa to be made more than it has passed from the day of two or three hours.
And the benefit of ventosa of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and ad that which is effused to the eyes; but cover that it be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventosa is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that which is of cold complexion, or in the which is catarr, for it gives to that great harm.
And for that reason it does not cover that use of it the old, and in the heads of which are cold illnesses.
But to that one who over that is continuing over it is made oblivion; and for that reason it covers that you command the ventosa to rest his hand a little with the ventosa to the parties below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventosa of alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and for that reason confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it covers that the ventosa alkehel be unpelled a little, for if it is placed below, it engenders weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventosa of alhagdahan confers to the pains accident in the head and to obtalium, and emigranea, and prefocacio, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it covers that you command the ventosa to not press his hand with scarification for that it not incides the artery and accides flux of blood.
And ventosa below the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gingiva, and appearances to their of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the location of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the ventosa that is made over the two spatulas confers to caphatan, the which is made by repletion of heat.
And the ventosa of the two parts of the sides of the focils confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, for that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins slender of the others veins more gross within that it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the ventosa to not too much process in scarification, for the location is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventosa with which it is ventosa over alshosses and confers to the hemorrhoids of the buttock and to the ulcers more below.
And tell the windbag to make a large windbag, and that it be made of leather, because the area needs a strong suction; and very fine and subtle windbags are to be used and it should be scarified with a scarification.
But smaller windbags on the legs are applied for a lesser manifestation, because they draw blood from the whole body, and they are helpful for old pains of the lungs and the uterus, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and are helpful for boils and adenoids; and they are in place of phlebotomy of two veins, and they are helpful for two cavities.
But too much weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many men.
And the  healing power of the windbags is proper to the windbags of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the windbags is that you place the windbag at the beginning  void and suck by moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the windbags, but pause them lightly, and move them gently, and that the humors come to the place by equal advancement. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already red and inflate and that the color of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you must scarify him once and no more, because the place not be ulcerated.
And command the windbag maker to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood is thickness, then you must scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtilization to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then the third scarification is made so that the last is obtained.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices us.
And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we knew that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with a pre-existing scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the windbags should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolvent; if it is in summer, as is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of double almonds, or oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of sanc, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, sticky, then the oil should be marigold, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
But if the windbag is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should have the places of the windbags near their application washed with water or with cold water of solanum, or with quince water, or with water of borlaguas, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, washes their windbags with strong wine, or with myrtle and sumac water, and similar to those.
And of that one whose superfluities are thick, washes their windbags with old wine, or with water of  sassafras, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to those similar.
And the windbag should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and should sleep near the windbag.
What is that which ought to be done to regulate the windbag before phlebotomy?
And at the beginning, you should consider: then if the windbag or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and windy, and their blood is acute and inflamed, then you should nourish causes that are cooling, such as vinegar-soaked millets, endive with strong wine and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and to those similar.
And pause their foods as much as possible, and foods of served birds, and foods seasoned with sour things, and to those similar.
And of that one whose complexion is cold, it should be nourished to drink syrup of almiva, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and strong wine, and to those similar; and that he be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause their foods as much as possible, and canabir, and sparrows, and small birds, and doves.
And that on the day of windbagging and phlebotomy, the drinking should be greater than the food.
And that in some hours to certain men, tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, so it is muscada, or alcelita be given before the windbagging or phlebotomy or near, so that the main limbs be comforted and the blood be subtiliated; and that they should not take that scalfatz.
But the incisions that are made, those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the armpit, because these members do not suffer incisions on themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather the traction of blood from the limb, just as you place a cupping glass on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the blood of the nose; and use it so that the cold, invisible cupping glass of the limb is dissolved, just as you place it on the belly and the navel; because it thins the limb and warms it and removes the pain because it resolves the cupping glass.
And it is already placed on the boils when they occur in their opening or pyre, because by virtue of the strong traction, the pus is drawn out and the pyre is eradicated from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen, cupping glass in those enclosed places.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with suction alone; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the cupping glass is filled and is larger, so it is water poured alone or water in which herbs have been boiled for the purpose convenient.
Form of cupping glass administered with fire: its orifice diameter is two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon is the majority of a palm; and be in its place, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the trauc be small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Be made of a sheet of lead or copper, of large edges, lion, smooth and level so that it does not damage the limb of its position over it.
And be in the middle of it a transverse bar of lead or iron, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already be this cupping glass larger than the one we have recounted; and the pause smaller than that according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the infants and the emaciated are others than the cupping glasses of the young and of robust bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that extend the wick with fire of decent wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is ignited around the departed part so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then be placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger be on the trauc that we have said, because when we have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that they show the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that trauc, then the cupping glass is dissolved instantly.
And then ignite the wick according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated by it.
But in a cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor trauc, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping glass as much as it is larger, so much better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in most limbs but in the limbs in which it is not possible to position cupping glasses, because of their smallness, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a limb denuded of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similars.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of muddy ponds.
And then they are laid the day and the night in muddy water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of them; and then be evacuated the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and with cupping glasses; and then be cooled the limb of the patient until it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction of the place with cupping glass, it is more beneficial in judgment.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then with much water; and be rubbed and expressed.
And if the bleeding of the blood is prolonged after the placement of the leeches, and it is this result, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it over until the bleeding has stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then pulverize over it tri-sulfur vitriol, or galls and similar to them of the causes styptic, until the blood is stopped; or be placed on the place the halves of boiled beans, and be laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And cover, if necessary, iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then be rubbed the place with recent blood or put a needle in the places until blood escapes; and then be placed, because those when they feel any blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to relax, sprinkle a little crushed aloe, or salt, or ash, over them, and then cover them.
Thus begins the prologue of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations that happen to the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this chapter, and those who have never looked at the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at all; and I have not adopted this that I have learned, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science from them.
And then I turned to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which my best experiment has been passed; because I have now shortened it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and shortened it to the end of shortening; and showed it to the end of declaration; and formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which a preliminary is necessary before we begin the recollection of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say that in the prologue of this chapter, the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artificers are forced and stand on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art others than yourselves.
And therefore I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must at the beginning take care with phlebotomy or to purge that, or one of the two, if no cause forbids it, as much as the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you come across is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then let him be content in his food of fresh herbs and of birds' flesh and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and to fill him with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of the cautery abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment, thick and heavy, in which there is viscosity, as such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and cow bellies, and eggs, and fresh birds, and fat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the bones that are fractured in men who are in their first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
But however, nature adjusts and amnesties over the broken bone of every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is at the same time conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause forbids it from its works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with the recollection of every species of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the other.
Many diversities of fracture within itself. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in themselves; for there is made arched fracture, another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the saga and stars and additions proceeding and not proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is small fissure fracture.
And to every species there is generated or torment proper in the restoration of it according to what will come recollection of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by this, the fracture of the bone is known: it is the twisting of it, and from that eminence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that it is a small twist or fissure, therefore, you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole; also place on it of the medicines of which remembrance is made near this moment, the one which convenes to the place; and then be strict by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or another thing that does not happen in it, as it is remauged all of its part, then you must begin from your hour to rectification of it, and that it should happen to it after cautery abscess.
And if it happens to it abscess cautery, then leave it for some days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it according to any manner that you can of lightness and engineering.
And know that restoration of it and its healing is lighter than of the bone in which such a thing happens.
And then strengthen it according to what will come the remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are splinters, then it is necessary extension of this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be the position with which you place the limb, bandage it according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then you pierce that you may make return those additions with engineering and according to any manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation pain or injury; and pierce yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any other cause, rectify that and bandage it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such foolish doctors who do many times cause abscess cautery by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen by the operation of their foolish deeds.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the foot and the finger and similar to those, then you must the enveloping be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be enveloping wide and hard, because the wide binding connects the large limb and strengthens that of all parts with even constriction, in such a way that in it no macula enters.
And then, begin, and your evacuation of constriction, pause ligament convenient to this, over the place of that fracture with three envelopings or four according to what the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then go to that part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than not to force your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself with enveloping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with enveloping, and then go to the envelopings to the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the enveloping and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first enveloping above.
And then pause between the envelopings of stopa lion or cloth with which is evened the twisting of the fracture, if in it is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopings stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause over it that which sits the abscess that and that oste the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And be the stars of the majority of wide-bodied cane, and well formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and be the width of each star according to this form and this figure:
However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and a little wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint should be according to how it fits the limb in size and smallness; and then strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then tie it above with a firm bandage according to what we have said about constriction, and it is that your constriction should be according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is longer, the less the constriction.
And so that the threads should be medium in thickness and subtlety, and be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some fools putting their threads of cords of hemp, and it is a great error, when the constriction is outside equality.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a constriction with those that you want, and it is not that between splint and splint there should be less than a finger's width.
And if the patient is said by the extremities of the splints near the constriction in those places, then place some cotton wool or carded wool between them so that it does not cause him injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and accidents happen in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that a broken limb is not immediately straightened with splints on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed upon splints but rather about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your certainty of the advent of a boil.
And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients restored, those which were placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
A manner of splinting as if it were a restoration of a fracture, convenient to many complications and mostly to women and children, because it is of that which does not bring heat or cold; and it is that you take of flour powder, and it is the medulla of the flour that depends on the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
And make it thus, unless you sift it with album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of that.
Another way of plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all be ground and sieved and mixed with alichil water or album of hen if the patient's complexion is hot; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and confers on many men.
Another way of plaster which confers on fracture and sprain: take migrach and white althea powder ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloen ana drac v; of acacia drac. vi; of Armenian bol drac. .xx.
All should be triturated in a mortar with much contrition, and sifted, and comfitted with water or album of egg and be administered.
A manner of splint to joints and separated bones of their places, and if pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool felt and immerse it in vinegar and olive oil and place it upon the location.
More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of boil caut and expels pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; conterey all and make a plaster of them.
A manner of plaster abbreviated administered deserves the restoration of a fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: recipe roots of althea, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of ers flour, of all ana part .i.; Let all be triturated and comfitted with vinegar, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then make it with humid coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster more potent in resolution than the first, when accidents happen a hard boil deserving the restoration of the limb: recipe of roots of althea and of seed of lily, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all ana part i equal; all should be triturated and comfitted with water of hazel or with sweet water or with vinegar, all according to the quality of the limb and the rest of the color of it.
But Ipocras does not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken limb deserving its restoration, but rather made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it should be medium between thickness and subtlety.
But Gualia has seen that they should be placed on the broken limb deserving its restoration, and the causes in which is dryness with little of heat so as myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts the lesion and pain: take flour, of chickpeas, of human hair cut or feathers of bird, and of flax, and salt, parts equal; be ground and sifted and be cooked, and be made plaster.
May the quantity according to which cove that remains the ligament and then be dislocated, is that you consider if no it occurs pain nor numbness nor the bone is broken no harm of its place, then you no untie in many days. And if it happens to the place vehement pain or numbness or inflammation, then you take or untie that in the hour, and place the plaster on it.
And take cloth of linen and sea sponge lion humid, and submerge that in tepid water, and with that wash the place until that numbness and pain is calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and lay over it for a night until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is calmed.
And then iterate that stricture subtle and small plaster and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the heat and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents already are calmed of all, and indigeysses of plaster and of stricture, then you iterate that as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if no it happens to the member any cause of those that have been said, then you no untie that but to three days or four or five or seven; and some times all that is left for twenty days according to what to you appears by the untieing of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the stricture more than in your first stricture all, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to that is preceded the remembrance of him.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to arrive to that; and therefore embroca that with tepid water you must every time that you untie that; and that in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation run to the member the nourishment, and it is healed lightly.
But that which do the fools restorers of the fracture of the member another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to that it should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, it is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straight that which enlarged the Ancients in their books and they were armed with that operated.
And I have not seen to any of theirs that do that, because it is more reasonable that that should not be done.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because of fractures some is made by percussion of a blow, and the percussion breaks all the bone into the skull, the which is left the bone, as if it were broken in the shaft, and for that this species is named ascial; or the blow incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the rear of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or little, and of fracture that is contortion or attrition; and cause of it is percussion with a blow or the falling upon a rock, and their resemblances.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or little.
And of fracture it is that it is embedded in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for that this species is named fracture capillar.
And it is fracture that is made either by falling or by percussion of a rock and its resemblances, that makes enter some lamina of the bone to the parts inside, and it is made in the place concavity as if it happened to the payroles of a ram when it happens to their percussion and it is part of their entrance to the parts inside.
And mostly it is made that in the bodies of bones humid, as if they are heads of infants.
And to all these species fractures satagias, so are their weights as if stars separated. And I will come with remembrance of all that in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with touch and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the species capillar is known by that which is discovered upon the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined upon it with touch, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification upon pain, as it is vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and easement of the heels and heat of those, and resemblances to them of the accidents in the major dispositions,  adopt that it is not healed.
And if you see no-flowing accidents, then you begin the cure of him.
The cause of which is that if it has come to you the afflicted at the beginning as he is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study the state of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must study the state of the bone before the seventh day, having that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and attrition, then you must inscribe the minute and rubbed part, according to what I will recount to you.
And it is that you raise the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner to you possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light upon the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of blood or pus, then you oppose it with what you have, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and olive oil rubbed, and make the plague rest until the abscess is settled, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then you begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you inscribe the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor this, a little more wide than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer more the incisor more wide than the second.
And you must have you a number of various incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use of them with ease in percussion upon the incisor so that it does not break the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must perforate in the circuit of it before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-profund drills.
And they are not called thus but because those do not pause the term of the bone of the test to that which is nearby it, for so the drill is rounded extremity or margin upon that which is left the head of it acute seeming to margin or to small circle, the which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a great number of which as much as convenient to the thickness of each bone, insofar as it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill upon the bone and revolve that with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause that which is between all trauc the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then inscribe with incisors that which is between each trauc of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can upon that in end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments the which you will have apparelled to that, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And you must guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the cephalic.
And therefore cum you will have circuited the bone perforating, and if it is continued with it, and you will have that extracted, you must raise and smooth that in the asperities of it of that which is in the bone with other instrument seeming to incisor, however you must have that it be more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if there remain any particles of the small bones and fragments, then take that with ease with that which you must of the instruments; and then cure the plague with lichens and ointments the which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, the which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: Necessary is to you in the beginning that you begin to discover the partition of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, insofar as when you will have discovered that partition and you will have paused below it the extremity of this incisor lent and agile of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular partition is long and you do not inscribe any cause, and the acute partition is of it in two sides forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular partition be adjusted to the cephalic with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then percute with upon the incisor of a partition with a small mallet insofar as you inscribe all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and you be sure of the panniculus that no accident happen in it which you fear in any manner, and if the medicant14 were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Now if any cause is attached to the bone of the panniculus in some places of the bone, cut it with the edge of the scalpel at the extremity and deliver it with ease, because it is delivered from its pain and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is separated or taken away from the bone is its fascia, and remains in it roughness and subtle satagias, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those satagias with subtle razors with which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer in each place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are conducting your operation that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your ratio with which razors you scrape the bone at the beginning the most blunt of those razors, and then use the more subtle of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you reach to administer the most blunt and the most subtle of all of them.
But in any of the other fractures, petid capillars and subtle fractures, when you administer care according to what you are conducting to its rectification.
And it is a cause that it is not well-known about all of those who have studied in that art. And this about what we have written has shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is cut when you eradicate the bone, then when you take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not hurt the scalp; and then administer over that bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has alone.
And leave this with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie this and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, as such as root of lin and flour of errs, and powder of enses and of aristologia, and of similar things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized over the wound, as such as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of propriety of which is that it abstergesca and not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and be not in it dirt of enguent or other; nor allow virulence to be added in it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and you can spoil that, and it happens over the patient what malicious evil.
And it happens in the scalp of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when it is lessened the care of it, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious all its adopted.
And if it does not happen blackness but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts iii., and in those lines a cloth, and then place that over the scalp; and then cure this with the species of cure that convenes until it be healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those sometimes, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and it does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then when you introduce the said little one into its nose, and that you equalize that fracture from within with your said indication, and with the said point outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And let this be done by you with ease, and guard yourself that no pain be caused over the patient by that your operation.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach that, then when it be equalized with the extremity of the ray in which it be small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And hasten yourself with the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then about the vii or x of days the rest of the abscess caut.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two calguas, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the calgua thickness of such quantity that it fills the trough of the nose.
And I say some of the ancient restorers that the calguas be enveloped in boder, and be changed in every day, but it is not seen to me; it has cove that the piece be enveloped in album of huou with powder of moli; and then leave the qualgua until the bone be formed and the cartilage be hardened.
And sometimes be entromes in the nose, in place of calgua, pena of auca pus that is enveloped of cloth of the lion; and be that you already have the fracture of the nose most vehement and that the patient not be prohibited from inspiration.
And this reason is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do calguas.
And if another abscess occurs after cauterization, plaster the nose with cerot or with cotton dipped in strong wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if no abscess occurs after cauterization, then cover that with a plaster of sesame flour and powder of roasted quince seeds with egg white; and place a linen cloth on top, and do not touch the nose with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are splintered, then cover those, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for those; and then close the fissure, and cure that with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters suitable for that.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then cover that with cauteries and administer lead tubes while it is entirely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a plague, then observe if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its cognition is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the right index finger; and push with that the flexibility of the fracture inside with ease to the outer parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and with this decency equal that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then cover that you administer extension of two parts according to rectitude while it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope that they will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and place on the broken jaw cerot, and place on top of it doubled cloth, and place on top of the cloth a large splint decently made, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and tie that underneath according to how the ligation of it is prepared for you and how the application convenes, while it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and pause the food of him soft leons.
And if you estimate that already the figure is altered in any manner, then you take it off and untie it on the third day; and then rectify that which is already altered of it and plaster it with powder of moli, with egg white, or with sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot of it, and place on top of the plaster linen.
And thus, as it stands annexed and adjusted that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time occurs abscess after cauterization, then administer that which we have said many times in the sedation of it while it is healed, and be removed that abscess.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or splinters, then you subtilize that you remove those splinters with that which you convene for that in the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is strait, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomi according to the quantity of your necessity.
And after you will have removed those splinters, and of those nothing is removed, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place on it one of the plasters that convenes for it and encase it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three manners.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated in two parts one that does not occur splinters; and it is easy to the restoration of it; or it is so that it occurs in it splinters, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make be present two ministers, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And after engulfs the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what you cove, and not be in it little eminence or concavity.
And if you indigeysses more of extension, then cover below the tittillic of the patient's hope of cloth or of wool, and be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the clavicle and constrain the hope with your hand until you engulfs the fracture according to what you cove.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the outer parts, because it is arrived at the preon, then cover that the patient be resupinated on his neck, and place on top of the muscle of it a cushion medium in greatness.
And the minister presses the muscle of him at the back parts until the bone of the collarbone is elevated that is in the shoulder on top, and then you straighten the fracture and bandage it with your own hands.
But if you feel splinters of the collarbone and they are bad, then do what you do on that and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this, because you had placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves the chisel; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus as sometimes, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is certain of an abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is little, or you fear abscess, then you plug the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the cut of the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then infuse a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over that.
And all, that the board not be bad over the broken bone; and for so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the board already being remade, then you rectify that and strengthen the binding.
And then place the sleep of the patient on the neck of him, and place below the little finger of him, the sleep of him in the night a small cushion; so that with that be elevated the assistant of him from the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of him tied to the neck of that.
And do not untie the binding if you do not happen in the place promptly or abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it is restored and is coagulated the fracture of the collarbone.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men is made in less time of that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known but by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
And then place over the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then place powdered cloth doubled; and then place over it a board made of thin wood according to the quantity of the spatula all or maybe a little.
But if below the board is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you wrap that concavity with linen cloth, and then put the board according to equality.
And then strengthen above with a long humid cloth with constriction decent and firmness of the board until it is not remade from its place.
And consider the binding every day; and all times that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the board if it is remade from its place.
And place the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone and put below the collarbone, then you separate over it, and take it out, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of the removal of abscess if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the broken foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle part of it and that is quite painful; but the extremities of it move and are cracked and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when the middle part of it is broken, it is that it declines to the parts of the inside and accidents to it great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and cough, and strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be laid the patient on their back, and place between the slats of it a cushion; and then press on the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtiliate in the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner that is ad this possible and that convenes ad this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and cloth and place above the table of a subtle fine gauze or of caligi and of their semblance in levitat, because you envelop that in cloth; and then subtiliate in lian that over the broken bone that it not be harmful; and go to ligation according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with stricture decent; and then consider the ligation in every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the desliament of that, you must corrode or pruziment, the pain, or the abscess that accidents in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which accidents by that with manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, sometimes to the face; and adjust to it stricture until it be healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places gross that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the front part, it does not accident to those contricio but by that which they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden to the feeling, so the inquiry of it with the said.
And the restoration be thus that aligns the fracture with the said according to the manner possible, until that it be aligned according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with stela, if it be indiges of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of the inside, then accidents to the patient vehement pain and puncture, as much puncture that accidents to him that has pleureci, and by that which the bones put the veil; and accidents to it difficulty of breathing, and cough, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in that with motz engientz.
And of them it is that they say: whoever pauses viandas of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, because the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
But we would not advise that for that it not be cause leugiera to generate abscess caut, if it does not accident; and if it already accidents, then it already helps to that.
And they said some of them that it be laid upon ventoza and then that it be sucked with fortitude; and it is seeming to ratiocinacio, but however it is feared that the ventoza will drive the superfluities to the place by the weakness.
And they said some of them: whoever the place be covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and be placed powders between the ribs until it be filled, that it be the ligation aligned when it envelops that according to roundness; and then be cured the patient with cure of pleuresi of food and of medicine.
And if it causes vehement constrict the patient which does not suffer, and the bones put the veil with puncture ledent, fear over the patient, then whoever they cut over the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserves the ciphac, the memory of which is preceded, and that they incise the bones with facility, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with sewing, and cure that with plasters until it be healed.
And if it accidents inside abscess, then you cut and stuff powders in rose oil and place over the place, and that it be cured the patient with that which cove to the abscess inside.
And be laid on the side on which it sleeps, until it be healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it happens fracture to the bones of the neck, and it is quite painful to them, and seemingly to the vertebrae of the back. And as it happens to some and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for if sometimes its hands already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot more those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrain those with your said or prick those with needle and it does not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the most dispositions it is mortal.
And if he feels those constrictions with his fingers and punctures, then you know that the bone's neck is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck the appearance of that and want to know if it is healing or not, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already softened, accustom yourself to that which happens in the limbs, and as soon as you put your hand on his back, you will feel a loosening and evacuation according to his will, and sometimes it happens that he is turned on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in his cure.
But if you do not notice any cause of those things, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure of him is that you perforate the seat of the abscess with a cautery and place it on the affected vertebra, rubbed with olive oil or with hot poultices; place that on it several times a day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if you notice the separation of the bone from its socket or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with some kind of ointment of the surgeons, until it is healed.
But if the tailbone is broken and it is the end of the pelvis, then cover it with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with some kind of ointment of the surgeons, until it is healed.
And if you feel broken splints in it, then cover it with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with some kind of ointment of the surgeons, until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the Restoration of the Womb.
The bones of the pelvis are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication in the extremities of those and are incised in the length and incline to the sides; and you notice the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is over the fracture as the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it only, then you align that according to what it is fitted by nature, aligning it until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or what already inclines to the sides, then you make the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared for you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have aligned it, place on it plaster, and then place on it a bandage of bast or of bandage, and strengthen by constriction over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with that which fills it until that presses the constriction according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if you notice an abscess cauterize, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is cauterized, and place on it what seats it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as you cover.
And if you notice it in the bone splints or they are comminuted, then you reduce them.
Chapter XI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Arm.
Arm is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is one that you take a splint of medium thickness according to this form:
And be tied at two extremities two bandages, and then be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm on the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which the curve of the splint is annexed.
And then suspend on it some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the sides; and then the physician and that the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it covers.
And the other way is that the patient be turned on his neck and suspend the arm of his collar with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below it; and whichever of them extends to its part.
And if you want the extension to be more strong, then you strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and whichever of the two ministers extends to both their parts.
And therefore if the fracture is proximate to the extremity of the muscle, then cover that the half of the bandage be placed over the shoulder and the other below the fracture of the joint.
And if the fracture is near the hip, then it should be placed on that spot and on that hip.
Wrap that with ease and work it, and as soon as it is wrapped according to what is due and applied for good application, then strengthen it if it does not occur after abscess caut.
But if an abscess occurs, then loosen the constriction on the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in wine and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then you strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is that you place a plaster on the fracture, and then place a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open on their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm be in place of stars, if nothing prohibits this from the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place over the fracture that star that is pus wider and pus stronger of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and be the length of the stars according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the constriction which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your constriction over the place of the fracture be pus tight. And as much as it is elongated the fracture be the constriction lesser.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear abscess caut, then you loosen the constriction and the stars on the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing occurs in the place proximate or inflammation; or is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of constriction; and therefore rectify everything according to what we have said.
But if you are on confidence that nothing occurs from this, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And be the sleep of the patient on their back, and their hands on the stomach.
And place over the support a cushion full of wool wrapped, and consider at every hour of the night or day that it not be loosened nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have said before, in such a way that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then it is necessary that you increase the food of him.
Because of custom of the support and the bed of him it is that they be tightened for forty days; and then it is necessary that they be loosened and be administered bath and be medicated with ointments the ones which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid rubbed, then you do not untie from that the ligament and the stars until after the days or until after two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearms; of which one is small, and that is the one that reaches the little finger, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed below the little finger, from the part further down.
And very often is broken the major forearm only, or the small, and very often they are broken together.
And when is broken the small forearm above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when is broken the forearm of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small forearm above, then it is convenient to the physician, it is necessary to restore it, that place small extension with ease until that be wrapped.
But if the large forearm is that which is broken, then it is necessary that place extension more vehement.
And if the two forearms are together broken, then it is necessary that you place the constriction more strong.
And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand, the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more outward than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a fallen cushion.
And be a cushion before him in the altitude or straightness of him, so that the patient does not curve work.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part further down with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends above similarly.
And then the physician wraps the bones until he reduces that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bones are splinters, then you pierce to reduce all piece in its place with your virtue.
And if there appears in him a separated hernia that pinches the cord and you have no hope in the restoration of it, then you act on it and remove it in the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plaque, I have already made a separate chapter about this, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an abscess occurs after the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and make it of medium thickness between strength and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth above it with a subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerate and place a prepared plaster of powdered mortar with clear of egg, and then place stars; and let the star be the one placed above the fracture, more wide and more strong.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm is six in the major dispositons, or the fracture in one focus or in two foci together.
And place your structure over the place of the fracture more strong and more vehement, and as much as the stricture is directed to the parts above the fracture or to the parts lower than it, place the stricture a little more soft according to what is preceded the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture be soft cloths, humid, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened be of the proper medium between subtle and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if there occurs any cause for which rectification is necessary, as much as prudently the one which occurs to the limb, and then cover that you enclose the limb with lukewarm water until that prudency ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already remade and resembles those, then rectify all of it with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb by superfluity of stricture, for then cover that you soften that one a little and let it for a few days until it runs to that the nourishment, and then strengthen that.
But if to the patient there does not occur any cause of those that we have said, then cover that he not be displaced for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of movement agitatius, and make him sleep upon his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or at most it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of it is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that to the thumb and the joints of the fingers, tart ends should be fractured, and there does not occur to them but attrition a few times.
And when a fracture or attrition occurs to the hand, then cover that the patient follow a straight line and in front of him lies it according to equality, and then place the hand of him upon that extended one.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are conjoined with good conjoining.
And then cover that you place plaster and stopa, if there does not occur abscess caut; and then place a star above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in a cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm of the hand, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient that he strengthens that with his fractured palm; then be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the star be of leather with cloth in which it is levitated, so that the leather be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what cover.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then cover that you place above a star and another star of the lower part in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight; and then place the structure, as much as the hand is revolved to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if there occurs a fracture to one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the finger that is placed, be aligned according to what cover and then be strengthened with the palm and if you want, place to it a small straight star so that the fracture be elevated and not be damaged.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle place, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then be aligned and tied with the finger that joins it; or be all tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place upon that a small star, as much as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and that, the disposition of abscess caut and oppose — with your operation — to that which cover when there occurs any cause of those, according to what is iterated the narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip many times is fractured and is declared to the feeling according to that it is converted to the part in front and to the most sovereign.
And the restoration of him is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is left below the fracture, and the patient is prone on his belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its end according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is at the root of the thigh, then the ligament is brought close to the bone at the point of the hip, so that the extension is on it, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is at the hip, then the ligament is made close to the bone, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor joins the bones with both of his hands until it is reduced according to the natural likeness and the bone is joined by a good junction; then cover with plaster and a splint, if not, it happens to the limb abscess. But if it happens to it abscess, then you leave it for some days until the abscess has cauterized, and then return to your cure.
The splint of it is made thus: cover that over the fracture a hard bandage, and fold that two or three times, and remove from it the superfluity; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the thigh.
And introduce long thread between the thigh and the leg from the hip to the lower parts, and come the ends of the thread from the point superior of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh that which superfluity of the bandage.
And then place upon the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place of those one splint upon the bone of the leg.
And then fill the vacancies between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint be coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint of the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you go away with the ligament of the place of the fracture, your splint be less and more lighter and softer.
And then extend the two extremities of the thread to the lower parts until it reaches the heel of the foot, and tighten both extremities of the splints of the other part so that the ligament be not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint over it, done so that it does not happen to the limb corruption or abscess cauterized nor swelling and similar to those; and if it happens any cause of those, then cut you from it, and rectify what happens all again, according to that we have said many times.
But if in the bone is a piece of the bone which puts, then cover that according to what is possible to you; and if not, cut over it and remove that, and cure with that of which is preceded the recollection until it be healed.
And some times is tightened this fracture of the thigh other thing that are adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a manner made, do not happen to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, other thing that be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp of the one which is always.
And know that the thigh is tightened in 40 days or a few months or a few less, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the socket of the hip.
Know that fracture of the socket of the hip is very difficult, but it happens to it many times attrition.
But if it happens to it fracture, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with a plague or several plagues, and over that all is established with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it be joined what is broken of its parts with the said ones until it be aggregated and joined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place upon it a round splint, if you need it; and tighten above it with a splint according to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as abscess cauterized and similar to those so that it be opposed to all accident to what is convenient to it until it be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is named by the name of the tibia; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
And happens to some of the species of fracture that happens to the two bones of the leg, and for that reason is made restoration of it as restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if so broken two bones together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if it is broken the thinner bone, the leg is converted to the front parts.
And if the largest bone is broken, then support it, and this is one of the reasons why you are not friends with it.
And then administer extension, flexion, and articulation of the bones according to that alignment.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is slight and has many splinters, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and this is when you align the bones and that completes your entire operation, then you will take splints of wood which are placed under the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made from palm branches; some of those which are of small thickness, and not be of the handles, and the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the bone inward to the furthest.
And then envelope each splint in two envelopes according to their length, and place one on the side of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they be from the bone inward to the lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremities and in the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left, and it stands for good position.
And now is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And most importantly, that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is called properly.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with it by later study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or from other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, then oppose yourself to it with what you must before that it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and of the digits.
To the talus no occur fractures of all; but to the bones of the foot occur fractures sometimes; and to the digits of the foot few occur fractures, and not occur to them but attrition in the midst of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot it be necessary fracture and times those bones be elevated above themselves among them, then the patient pause his foot upon the earth prepared thus as they go.
And then pause one foot upon that which is elevated of those bones, and then step upon them, and press, and align them until they return to the places.
And then pause plaster and stopa above, and pause below the belly of the foot a small table to which be two caps placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot with structure descent, because you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which you have said.
And when to it pass three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones aligned, or they be broken or they be dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as you know.
But if some digits are broken, then restore those, and align them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the digits of the hand. And then pause to the broken digit splint according to the length of the digit, and be a little wider of it; and below the foot this table which to you has been recounted, and strengthen that with stricture decent.
But if that which is broken of the bones be two or three or more, then you pause upon each digit splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing upon one of the caps of the table foro the belly of the foot so that it have with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes of which you have been told in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with what you must.
Chapter XVIII.
Of fracture of the hip bone of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the groin of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a  cella  cared for, and then incline that to the side of the back a little, and it be held behind.
And then the matron impales the hip bone of cotton, and it be made in the hip bone of it as she hopes; and then the woman be confined, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is thrown out until it be before the part of the hip as she hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then pause pillows upon the back of her, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with facility and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you have observed that at the beginning, and then return to her first pillow.
And do thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen upon the back of her a tube of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the hip of her, and then puff into the tube with virtue until the bladder be inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and kept for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or a woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is straight should not be hidden in these proper fractures and which few understand, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions a straight path in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the thigh of a man when it is broken, take a splint of wood, and place the thigh in it; and then place a bandage over it, and have it wrapped, and then leave it for three days or about those, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is in a plague.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture happens with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or the humerus, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize it as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to the retention of it as much as you pulverize over it with three times as much, if to you another cause is not present.
And then, as soon as you begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not happen to have an abscess.
But if an abscess happens, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the hip uncovered, then you must take care to perforate to reduce it and stitch it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not to your prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary for the physician to prepare of those three or four according to the quantity that you indiges to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And let it be round, and let there be little thickness in it so that it is not doubled of the compression over it in the hour of the operation.
And let it be of an acute extremity at which let there be a margin in its extremities; and let the underside of it be of a tending thickness, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a little pale.
Because it must be placed the extremity of it to ascend elevated over the extremity of the bone prominent.
And impel it in one movement until the bone returns, and it is stitched with some equation.
And therefore strive to stitch the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recommended, then cut it with what you convey to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with a saw in whatever manner it is to you possible.
And then smooth that which remains in the bone of roughness and of small scales.
And as the bone is reduced, and then the reduction the patient feels vehement pain, then you know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
When is completed your restoration which you do to the bone, and then immerse cloth in black styptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague cerot nor another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause in it to happen putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you cut the tract with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, because many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to happen over their patients death or sickness corrupt or cruelly, so it is healed. And if your stitching is lighter, softer, different from the stitching of other fractures.
And if the plague is large or is a bad plague, and you fear over that some bad accidents which we have recommended, and you feel pain in the place, then you must not place over it stelas, but make to it an envelope of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And when about a day or two already the plague begins, that in it there is generated brac, then you remove from under the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer calques, ointments with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, as ointments tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is necessary for you to untie the ligament and consider the plague on each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and hardened, and so that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus runs from it to the lower parts with ease.
If the plague passes many days, and is not consolidated nor is it separated from it the arm, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones because you must inquire the plague with a probe. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that of them are not separated and put the limb and make to happen pain, pierce you to incise those according to you this is possible.
And if it happens to the plague a zuchem or eluchen, it is stiomenios, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you apply to each of those what you deem necessary to the cure of which is preceded narrative in its chapter.
And of this in which you must know the best sermon and you make present your pestilence: when the bone is broken, elevate upon the limb as the bone of the thigh and the auxiliary and similar to those of the large members, and that you do not presume the traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times happens by this death; have left this until you can, because very soon it will fall by itself within 20 days or 30. And then cure the plague if it is seen to you, and if not leave that.
Chapter XX.
Of the cure of a knot that happens in the remnant of any fracture.
Many times happens this knot in the remnant of the healing of a fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and is distorted by it the figure of the limb; and very soon prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the knot is recent and administer in that medicines that have stipulated as such as aloen, and incense, and mira, and cercacollo, and acridity, and similar to those; in this way that you take of those some or all, and confide those with vi stiptic, or with album of huou, or with vi agre, and place that on the knot in cloth, and constrain those upon it for good constriction.
And leave constriction that you do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until the knot is removed; or strengthen upon that lamina of lead descentment, because lead has property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the knot already is in worse converted and tight is, and necessity provokes to cut that joint, and then cut that by the part sovereign of it, and incise the superfluity and eminent, or rat that with some rezoris until it is removed; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail, then it is not done sino for many causes: of those the one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of it made not according to what is coven; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until the nourishment be prohibited to run to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for paucity of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And cure of this is to give to the patient to eat and make the heart of him tender until the blood be multiplied in him; and administer baths; and introduce joy and levity upon him.
And then place a poultice upon the limb, so that the poultice draws to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with water tebeza, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of that which is coven.
When it happens to the limb already restored in the healing of it of crookedness and eminence in the broken bone and knot, and it is for that feeded of form of the limb, but however the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is necessary that you receive the word of him who exists that limb be of novel broken.
But already are stood many foolish physicians and restorers those who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable perjuring at great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if claudication and knot are recent, then it is necessary that they be embrocated with water tebeza in which are cut herbs mollificantz, as such as are the leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made a plaster with mollificatio plaster as dyallaquilon well made; or that be taken mucilage of root of altea and be contused with gray of gualina or with oil of cirami, and be plastered with that; or that be taken figs fat and be trissated with feathers of dove, and similar to those of the medicines that are named amermans consolidation.
And some times is dissolved with assiduous friction lighter that be with the moist hands, and be administered movement of the limb to all parts in all hours.
But if the curvature has already been added and is made strong and turned into a worse condition and the need for its cure arises with iron, then it is necessary that the pus above the joint and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that it be incised that which superfluously of the knot of that part with the bone with subtle scissors, and be administered facility in that with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of the limb, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient pains and great injuries.
Therefore, when an accident occurs to any dislocation, it is necessary to immediately try to reduce it, and not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce the dislocation with water.
And therefore, it is not necessary that the patient be bad or stretched during the time of inflammation, for often times it brings on spasms and intense pains.
But when this happens, then it is necessary that you take care of the patient's wound, and let it rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb be enveloped with warm water and oil, and then it be reduced with facility.
And every limb be cured with water of which the remembrance will come in its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what has been said before in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most below.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
So the two mandibles are dislocated if not tardy; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that they are removed from their places by a little movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complicated, so that they are softened at the junction, where the saliva of the patient flows and that he cannot hold it nor be able to close his mouth, and the tongue of him be enveloped in his word.
But when the dislocation of it is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered lightly, and not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and meanwhile the doctor puts his thumb of one of his hands in the root of the dislocation of the jaw from within his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he puts his two thumbs together, if the dislocation is of two parts, and the other said of his hands be outside with which he engales; and commands the patient to cease his mandibles and absolves those to go from each part; and the doctor engales the mandible and enpellicates the mandible until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and most of all if both mandibles are dislocated at the same time, then administer vaporization with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made lighter and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are engaled, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place over them powders of cloth with cerot, and be made of wax and oil rubbed; and be laid with facility with soft linens.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not maugue it to the right or left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be forbidden lion, until when the pains are removed and the mandibles are healed, then maugue it as he wishes.
And that be administered with facility, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for the eating and drinking and speaking, until the mandible is healed and sound.
And if the reduction of two mandibles when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then often times this happens fever and constant soda, and very much is alerted the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is perilous; and often times dies that one to whom this happens in x days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place from within by its continuation with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with strong grasping, for it will return.
And then place over that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
But the extremity of that which is tied and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and engaled according to what we have said and according to what is your apparel.
And then place a plaster, and powder, and a bandage, and command the patient to adhere to quiet and rest until he is healed.
And in this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the part below the muscle, and this is done hard; and it is not dislocated to the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the parts in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and pushed out to the parts below the thigh, and mostly in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of them is suppurated with a suppurating cautery, and it is cured because it is already dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you know this before you are over-certain of it, and then you will proceed in the cure of it.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is in the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you find between those manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle concavity and below the thigh of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a hoop, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it by all movements.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and then you find manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the parts above; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below where it returns lightly.
But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in lukewarm water and be administered a broth that softens and liniments as if it were made with roots of elder, fennel, and melilot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient be laid on his back and be placed below the thigh of him, waiting for a bandage between elevation and constriction, and the physician places his hand on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not moved to the parts below, because that instantly returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce it this way: and it is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and is on the part of that side, and interweaves his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates the thigh of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him that another cause be suspended, so that it weighs that, because the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long pole be laid on the ground, the head of which is rounded in figure, as if it were a mortar, that it is not thick nor thin, and then it be placed below the patient; because as it is placed on the head of the pole cloths are laid, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below of the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is a difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and the width of it is four digits, and the thickness of it is adjusted in the preon of the thigh according to this form:
And on the rounded head, lay cloths for so that the pole does not wound the patient.
And then it be placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm be extended on the pole into the parts below, and the pole be tied over the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm be placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other part, because the joint enters instantly.
And as the entering of it is completed according to whichever manner that is possible to you, then it is necessary that you place below the thigh a bandage of wool of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of molli with eggs and album of hen over all the muscle, as if it were rolled upwards, and then strength below the thigh with decent constriction; and the ligament be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to the neck of him, and be left, and not be moved the hand of him for seven days.
And that the patient's food be kept little, until the member is comforted, for it is lighter to the healing of it.
And then the food be given greater near wine or vinegar and be exercised a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or by another cause, then it is necessary that in that one be administered cautery with three probes, according to what is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not held, and the plaster and the constriction are reduced several times, and it is not held and the catgut and it cannot elevate that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that one which is made of the feet and the nipple or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And let the other constriction be administered in that one, and cure that one until it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing is heavy in the member and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient use of baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and that it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and that one is dislocated to all parts, and more so to the front part than to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not well-known to you because it is hidden after the movement or after the touch according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the hand, that is to you declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that one its muscle.
And that you put the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to it pus, because if it comes to it pus, it is difficult the reduction of it, and very little it is healed of all; and more so when it is to the back parts, because it is worse of all the other kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they die from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be upon the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands together, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns so that it bends the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it not be removed from the extension.
And then it be revolved the arm from every part, because it is enveloped cloth folded long on the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil so that that be those causes which help in lubrication of the joint with facility; and then pushes the joint with impulse vehement until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is necessary that it be laid upon that plaster in which there is sticking and application with album of egg, and it be extended with a downward constriction, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave that one.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that one for some days until it is extended; and then loosen that one.
But if it happens to it heaviness after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause upon the joint alleviated, so it is a kind of motion greasy; and then be bound, and leave that one over the bones the day and the night. And then remove that one, and put that one in bath; and when it dries, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat upon that alleviated, so it is a kind of motion, one time, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already reached the inner part of the tooth while it is in the bath.
And if you want, pause upon that a split of cow humid and scalded with border and strengthen upon that; and do that some times, because that one is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the malassen, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The dislocation of the hand is sometimes easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is true of the other joints, but however, it is necessary that the velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is suppurated or that it happens in it suppuration.
And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it in while it returns to its place.
But however, it is necessary to consider if the palm is already placed in the palm of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table, and the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent, then the position of the hand of that one intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor places on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns so soon, it is good; and if not, then strengthens that with an emplastre, yielding the suppuration and leaving it; and do not repeat this, for if not, do not suffer nor can you on the reduction of it more than days pass.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not give the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no way in it except that it is strengthened with a cautery near the place of it and forcefully apply it, conferring any cause.
Therefore, when the malasse is returned, then place on it the emplastre which have recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; and then let it be removed and left and the hand of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and occurs in it any gravity, then gently apply that with water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter .xxix.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in all parts.
And when a finger is dislocated from those to the back of the palm or to the palm of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it is healed in that its day.
And when it will be night, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do similar with this, if it is dislocated to the palm of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When a dislocation complicated occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck, and the displaced vertebrae are moved from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death seizes the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside his will, and cannot retain that; and many times are softened some members of it or both legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or is displaced a vertebra from its place, because many times is displaced and many times is made the removal of those to four parts.
Therefore that already is displaced to the parts behind and is called gibbosity.
But the cure of it is that then consider if the gibbosity occurs from puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor is the healing of it total.
But in that which comes from a cause or from percussion or similar to those, already said the Ancients the ways of cure with verbose sermons, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I already and abbreviated from that of which the little excuse of the trop of it, for the better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with the which I have here exposed and formatted from diverse instruments of that with which I will show this and expose that.
And of those is not cured except that which occurs in the back properly with that which I have recomposed.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face on a bed near a wall, and be extended below him a soft instrument so that the feet of him be not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around its head, and another stick in the opposite end of the bed under his feet.
And the minister holds the stick, and it not be fastened in the fossa; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and leave the linen firmly tied; and extend the extremity of the bandage to the shaft which is the head of it, and tie it there; and then tighten the other bandage around their hips and under their legs, and cover their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other shaft which is the feet of it.
And then the minister cascu extends the bandage to the part of the shaft, and do not be removed the two shafts and the bandages from their places in which they are placed, but however do not be stopped as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or that places upon that a table, and then that adjusts upon the table his feet while it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is in favor of three spans, and dig in the wall of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then place the majority of the table upon the spine, and the doctor places his feet upon the other extremity, and tightens well while the spine is shortened and that it returns to its place.
And if you want, open with a turn which is revolved with the hand; and it is that you place on the ground behind the fist two shafts, the length of which is of an arm, and behind the head of it two shafts as well; and let the length that is between each shaft be a palm, and already it is done in each shaft a groove in which runs the turn, and each one be stopped on the ground so that it is not bad.
And let it be also a shaft round in which is the turn, and let it be revolved in the two grooves of the two shafts.
And in the extremity of it is a groove in which is formed the shaft, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other shafts is similar to that.
And then tighten the bandages that you have tightened in the feet of the patient in the groove which is the head of it, and the bandages that you have tightened in the thighs of it in the turn which is the feet of it.
And then place each turn and stay a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover that with a paste of dried alum of water, and then cotton; and then place upon the paste a board of the table of which the width is three digits or about those, and the length of it is the quantity that embraces the place of the belly, and upon the part of the spine yes.
And then bind with a bandage the one which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while it is healing.
And if there remain any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines be administered which soften and lubricate with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a sheet of lead.
And some times an imminence occurs in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already imminence for that it is not necessary that it be done a prosompcio to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you occur death.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated only, and it does not occur to those that occur to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four manners, because it is dislocated to the parts inside, or to the parts outside, or to the parts in front, or to the parts behind.
And mostly it is dislocated to the parts inside, and few to the parts in front or to the parts behind.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the parts inside is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg behind the knee, and it is the place that if the knee is apostatized of caut, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one to which occurs dislocation is to the parts outside, is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one to which occurs dislocation to the parts in front is that it expands its leg according to compliment, but however it does not bend that ses pain that is in the thigh, and if it persists to go and cannot over that to the parts in front; and the urine of it is retained and the groin of it is apostatized, and of the ambulation of it over the talus.
And the sign of that one to which occurs dislocation to the parts behind is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that in front that it bends the groin, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the groin is mollified, and the head of the thigh is of that place.
The most accurate reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, that it is already fixed with that, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore do not think that in that there should be presumption.
But in the one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you take hold of it so that you turn the joint and extend it to the inward parts and to the outward parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will return well and does not need other cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of it from the farthest part, or with its hands, or with a bandage which is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of it below so that it puts its hands below the tibias of it; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And that extension of it or from the inward part to the shoulder, or from the back part to the part of the loins.
And that extension of all those at once while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and that remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then in every species it is necessary to do what we shall say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inward parts, then the patient must be laid on his side; and then place the ligaments on the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is below the shoulder; and then extend the ligament above the part of the shoulder to the highest part of the collarbone.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of it, and warms the thick place of the thigh of the patient and extends it to the outward parts by vehement extension, for that it returns to its place.
And this species is of the lighter cure with which this member is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused upon you and does not obey the entrance with this species of cure of all, then you must tie the two legs of the patient together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each of its parts by the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the pole, and that it is in the middle; and the length of it from the ground the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and that it is suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man lessen the thigh with strength impels, for the joint returns to its place with velocity.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the outward part, then the patient must lie on his back as we have recounted in the having gelbozzitat; and be tightened the ligament on the thigh of the patient properly and on the feet of it.
And then two poles are placed, one to the feet of it, and the other to the head; and then poles are placed adjusted to the middle of the pillow put on which wet cloths are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged because the pole is between the thighs of it, because the extension to the inward parts is not pulled.
And then each minister extends to its part, and the doctor with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the forward parts, then the leg must be extended lightly, and it is according to this same narration about the pillow; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the shoulder of the patient, and then pushes that with the other hand, and with that pushing he pauses that extended to the inward parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the backward parts, then you must not have the patient extended to the inward parts, and it is elevated above the ground; it must be placed on a hard cause, as it must be placed on two planks if the dislocation is in the outward parts, according to what we have said of the placement of it on two planks; and it is on its back and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And you must administer compression with a table on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is completed according to what you must—the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the two legs of the patient, and when you see those engulfs and the patient extends his leg and expands that ses excusacio, then you know that the member according to what you must is returned— and then you adjust two cushions and place a poultice and extend with a bandage so that the width is not damaged in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those joints in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and bandage that, and extend that according to your first structure, and leave that for three days.
And then untie that, and make that person delay walking for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts in front to the parts behind; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that already extends their leg, if it can over that; adhere your two hands to the face of it, and place their foot between your feet; and then make adhere the knee of it to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the knee of it with strength, and another minister extends their leg while the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh with lightness without labor.
And then bandage that and make adhere the leg to the thigh, and then tie those together at once with a bandage for three days or for four, and then untie those.
And do not use the patient of walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is dislocated by slight movement, and sometimes is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation of it is of slight reduction, and is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to complement, cove that you make the patient straight, and have one strong and valiant minister from the back of the two of it in the middle location of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part more below of the foot in the location of the heel.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right towards the thigh, so that the leg works.
And do this twice according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the thigh the third time, and you are at the heel.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, for that it returns.
But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it with that we have recounted, then make the patient lie on their two on the ground, and stretch a pointed nail in the ground firm, and that it lies between the thighs of it, and you already have enveloped over it cloth so that it does not sting the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with ligaments that lie on the neck of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the nail be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of it not be pulled to the parts below towards its extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the parts below, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause bandage and extend that with strong ligaments, and tie the foot with ligaments to the thigh.
And cove that you fear or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over that not be vehement and wound that strongly.
And then leave that for two days or for three; and if the ligament is softened, extend that.
And then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for forty days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done safely that the dislocation not be over it dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if a boil happens to him, then you should administer in the treatment of it the water that I spoke of in our narration, in another place of treatment and ointment, until it is cured.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
That which is dislocated should be straightened with little extension of its work; and that which is not difficult, lift it gently.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you should make the patient lie their foot on a flat surface of the earth or on a table, and be standing thus as if he were going.
And then you stand near the feet, and place your foot on that which you feel from the joints, and then press it with your foot with strength until it returns, and that you see it straightened and does not appear in the place eminence.
And then place under the foot of the patient a board that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and make the patient rest from walking for many days, until it is stretched and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of both together.
When any of those causes happens, and you are involved in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times death succeeds.
And for this reason, you should not presume over the cure of it, but rather he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not daring nor presumptuous; and that he uses in the beginning of medicines that cause boils to burst only so much, and leave the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the disease, and in which you see some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction in the beginning of the cause, before it develops into a boil.
And therefore, if the member returns as we want, then administer the regimen that causes boils to burst and cures the plague with the water that convenes to it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and happens in the bones separated, then you pierce the ligament of them, and do in that which we have said in the simple diseases of this which is preceded in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which to you is preceded my preaching; for that is better to you, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body those in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly from which God be blessed. Amen.
