O, son, be aware that you are being given the first aid to the patient's legs.
And if the surgeon has done something else to the patient's body, it is in the ancient texts that they call gout.
The intestine or other affected areas should be treated with a cushion.
Then you will know the differences between the knowledge of the body's anatomy and its humors.
The text refers to a medical procedure involving placing a cushion under the patient's foot.
One may say that he who knows not his knowledge on anatomy will be useless in surgery, for which one must use it.
The doctor called it a plague sore on their legs, and a painful ailment.
And so the man's intestines were cauterized, causing him to die on the third day.
And I knew by the size of the pain that he had gout.
Here's the translated text:
And if you wish to reduce the intestine or hernia, it is done by placing a cushion under them, and another cushion on their thighs, and another on their chest.
E a cushion under them, et autre they have already called for help.
Mays it is first necessary to make a cautery, but if it is necessary to cure the patient's pain, you should consult a doctor.
And then you will open the abscesses for the other doctors.
And if the ailment affects a person's health, it is called gout.
And so it is necessary to be cauterized, son, for two reasons.
And then you must apply the hot iron to the body part, and another hand on the affected area, to be sure that the patient’s humors are properly cauterized.
And thus, armed with these tools, the patient shall be healed.
And may your weapons be used on the worst diseases, but leave the rest for the glory of the Lord God, and let them remain in your name, and may your hands be left alone to protect the body from the pain of the soul.
When pain persists, they say in the old days that physicians used to call it by a more complex name. Let no physician be ashamed to admit they don't know all about it.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first part of the book. This first chapter is about the nature of the ailment itself, and the tools used for its treatment.
This is the second part of the division. The second chapter describes the use of cauterization to treat ailments.
The third chapter deals with the treatment of a twisted ankle or foot injuries, and the forms of the instruments used; and how the third chapter is organized.
The patient's condition refers to a state of health, and if they are experiencing pain in the legs, the first guessed translation is incorrect.
And so I say that gout is caused by humors that are cold and have been misidentified by many doctors as a sickness only in the feet.
And if you want to cauterize as a treatment, apply heat to the whole body except the patient's legs.
This text is about treating various ailments on their feet using a hot cautery tool.
Therefore, use heat to treat hot diseases, and apply cautery to their legs, applying it to the rest of the body.
And that's why I put my hand on his leg when he was suffering from the pain of gout.
Then apply to the body, as if for gout, you must use a cushion.
The translation is:  Let's translate the rest of the text.
And so on, put your hand upon the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
May the medicine then be applied to the patient's leg, which was inflamed by fire.
And if you have a pointed tool, and the patient's condition is good for the surgery, the doctor should be able to tell what the illness is from its severity, or how well the body will respond.
Therefore, you should know that gout is a disease that affects the joints during the season when it's customary to do so.
And if there is an experienced practitioner using a cautery for good purposes, such as healing, there is no need to worry about the time being wasted.
And if it is necessary to burn the affected area, apply heat to the area.
When the doctor is right in front of you, he will apply the hot cautery to the inflamed areas, and another place on the body where the heat can be applied.
Mays the patient be treated with respect to their illness, and that their legs and arms be tended to during treatment.
It is possible that the illness will return in the future.
E, in case of drye, a hot poultice is used to draw out the heat from the body, and another tool can be used to reduce swelling with a warm cautery, and cold with another.
This is an example of the text from the original sources referring to the use of "cupping" therapy, which involves applying heated cups to the skin to create suction and draw out blood. And if it is necessary to cauterize something from here, then apply a cautery to the area.
E si per lo ja es to make an incision in the body, that is,  to put something into the patient's body, for gold is a thing noble and pure.
And so that the patient's bowels are healed, and they are ready to receive something (inferred from the context of the text).
Then apply the cautery to your feet, but lightly.
And if it is necessary to open the bowels, I have ordered the patient to be treated with a cauteri.
The first chapter.
And so if you are treating a patient for a condition caused by cold or dampness, it is important to keep the body warm.
And you are to apply medicine for the relief of pain, as needed depending on the severity of the pain and the patient’s age.
E aprop places the patient's feet in the cavity, and put them on their knees.
And then apply cautery to the area between the patient's eyebrows. But you must also know that the original meaning is likely lost in translation.
And so, you are to apply heat to the affected area so that the bowels do not become constricted, as is customary for treating the disease.
E so you have a pain in your foot, e si tu es already using the cushion to protect your legs from injury, then you should be careful not to injure them while using the tool.
And apply a cushion to their legs for three days.
And then place your hand on the patient's foot to keep them calm while you cauterize their abdomen. Then apply the medicine to the patient's location, for it is a suitable remedy.
Then they said that when the plague is in the limbs, it is better to have a cushion.
And they should apply a cushion to the area of their pain, and place another under the patient's legs.
And then put a cushion under them, and thus they are cured.
And others say that it is other things than the foot that causes the pain in the feet, which is caused by a hot iron. And they say that you should treat it with a cautery.
And if they are suffering from the plague for a long time, it is customary to call them healed when the plague has passed.
May's a good thing to use if you have seen that they are suffering from an excess of cold humors in their body, but it's important to remember that it can be caused by many things, including blood flow issues.
And the most important thing is to save the first servant from that condition.
Chapter two.
Then apply the other treatment (a poultice or salve) to their legs, etc.
When there are poultices on the body, it is from those causes that the patient suffers. And then apply heat to the head where the pain is located. Incise the body part and apply heat to the affected area, which is called a "gout" in the medical field. And if you have a pain in your chest, you are suffering from a different kind of pain than others caused by cushions.
And if you want to make a mark on the head or the body, it is customary to use a less severe cautery for the body than for the skull.
The third chapter.
And on the treatment of the migraine.
Then apply cautery to the legs, using other medications.
When your hands are cold, put a cushion under them and keep them covered. Then apply a cautery to the area that causes pain in the legs only if a physician deems it necessary.
Then place three or four times a day the required materials on their legs.
And thus you have treated the patient's legs, they will be cured by that same ointment.
Then they will use a cautery on their legs, which are other things that may be burned.
Gout is when you burn your body with hot metrical humors.
Translation: And if there's a pain in the legs, it's called gout.
And so you apply a cushion to the pain in the legs and feet.
And if the patient has a fever or pain in the legs, it is often said that they have a cushion placed under them.
And then you have already placed a cushion on their legs and another on their feet, and the patient's body should be allowed to rest.
And if you wish, a hot cautery should be used for that purpose, as in the case of gout in the foot, it is necessary to apply the heat directly to the affected area.
Chapter four.
This refers to the treatment of gout.
When gout arises from an imbalance of the body's humors, then use a cautery to treat the patient's pain.
Empero, you must stop the pain in the patient's feet by using a heated tool to treat it, as well as those other pains that are caused by the same thing.
E layssa la persona be in the beginning of the surgery.
And then, apply cautery to their legs, and they will be treated according to the practices in this book.
And if you see that the patient's body is cold and weak, and the body has been affected by the plague, then apply a cushion to their chest, and do not let them go out.
And if you have already decided on the use of cauteri, then place your hand on their legs and one must be placed under them.
Chapter 5.
This is a treatment for gout, which is what doctors call it.
When in the foot there is pain from the knee to the toes, the patient should be treated by a surgeon.
When there is a cushion placed in the area between the legs, it's called a cushion, and when there is a cushion placed on the feet, it's "round" or "rheumatism". The doctor will be careful to apply cauteries gradually so as to avoid pain.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area on the legs or feet, as needed, to cure them.
Another important point to note is that the patient's legs should be kept warm.
A hot iron or other tools used for cauterization are applied to the area of the body where the pain is felt.
And it is cured by cauterization on the legs, as we have said in the treatment of diseases.
This is the first line of the treatise translated into English.
When you use the word "jerau" to describe a person's condition, they are referring to their health.
And if the pain is on their limbs, they should know that relief comes only when the body is healed.
Then you will cauterize the foot of the patient, placing a cushion underneath to apply the heat.
The form of the treatment, which is to be used in this way, is called a cauterization. But the body may also have some pain; use a little less force when applying cauterization.
And if it is necessary to treat the ailment of the cavity within the thighs, and another person has placed their hand on the patient's legs and a cushion over them.
Chapter 7
This is the ancient method of treating gout.
And so if apoplexia is an old ailment, apply a cautery to the leg of the patient; he will be cured in the way we have said. And the method of using a cautery is done as previously described.
And put your hand on their thighs, to prevent them from being afflicted by the pain.
Chapter 8.
And just as you would cauterize an inflammation caused by a hot humor, so too will you cauterize a wound caused by a cold.
The patient's legs must be supported by pillows or cushions.
And if it is necessary to treat the head, one should apply a poultice as described in this treatise.
Then place cushions on them, which they are to be used for cauterization. And so the patient's body is treated accordingly.
Then place hot iron on the affected area to apply cautery. Then, if the patient's finger is healed, you apply a bandage.
Mays: If the pain is in the legs, the pain is called sciatica if it is below the knee.
And if it is necessary to cure the ailment, then cure it carefully.
This person has a condition similar to gout.
And from cauterization to reduce pain throughout the body.
and proceed to cauterize the patient's body in three places: the head, legs, and cushion.
And if it is necessary to treat a disease with a cautery on the body, the pain will be severe, so place a cushion on their back when using it. And thus the intestines are treated in the following way, and the foot is healed.
Chapter 10.
This refers to the treatment of cauterization for those suffering from epilepsy.
This medieval medical treatise treats the condition of epilepsy, but only through cauterization.
Therefore, it is necessary to modify the brain at the beginning of treatment when the pain is severe, as we have discussed in the section on treatment methods.
And if the illness does not respond to medicine, then apply a poultice for relief, and use medicines for 10 days.
E appositely apply the other cushion on the head to prevent the intestine from being exposed. And if the patient's humors are strong and he is tolerant, apply cautery to the legs.
And do so with a cushion according to the preceding lines.
If the patient is a child, use a gentle cautery.
Chapter 11
De cauterizatio a cushion should be placed under the legs for melancholia treatment.
If a patient has melancholy due to corrupted humors, then apply a cautery as needed.
A patient suffering from melencolia should drink wine to cleanse the body.
And a poultice be applied to the affected area on the head, as well as one on each thigh for support.
And if the pain is felt on the foot, then it is a true indication of gout.
And then apply a poultice to treat the affected area. And if it is necessary to heat a part of the body, it is customary to apply cautery to the area being heated. Then place a cushion on the patient's feet.
And if the patient is suffering from a cold-humors illness, you must apply the cushion to the affected foot.
And if you have already placed your hand on their arm to keep the intestine from swelling up.
Another is placed on the legs, and another cushion is placed on the chest of the patient.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it should be applied on the part that is affected.
The intestines are in great pain, so the doctor cauterizes the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
And for that matter, you should let the patient rest for several days.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the patient, two instruments are used on their temples for the initial application.
When the veins and arteries are burned, it refers to the use of a cautery tool on their body.
And if the pain is caused by an excess of blood humors, a cushion can be used for treatment.
And with knowledge they are extracted from their thighs, legs, and feet.
And if it is necessary to have some sort of heating element placed on the foot, the patient should be cauterized when needed.
This chapter describes how to treat a disease that causes pain in the foot, likely gout.
And if you apply a cautery to the eyes, it is an old remedy.
The first source sentence seems to be describing a medical procedure involving heat and cauterization, but the language used ("aquel", "autre", "le mas") suggests it might be referring to something more specific than just general pain in the legs. And if you have a pain in their legs, they must be treated by a doctor.
Capitol 14.
De cauterizatio del pes
And if you don’t have the other cushions, use a cushion to help the patient's health. And place a cushion on the patient's legs, as they are in pain.
And guard the patient's feet so that they do not inflame.
And this is how you apply the treatment for it.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
This is the way to treat the eyelids being affected by the foot disease.
And if you are applying a cautery to the head, you should cauterize both sides of the head between the temples. And you have to apply it to their legs according to the amount of pain in the ankles.
Mayes the third part be afflicted by a swelling called edema.
This could be the start of a chapter in the treatise.
Then you must cauterize the patient's eyelid with a special tool.
When the doctors are using a hot cautery to treat the bowels, they use a burning tool.
If you apply heat to the patient's cushion, it will reduce swelling in the feet.
And so they are treated by doctors for the illness which resembles a gouty pain.
And then apply a poultice of hot wax or another substance to the affected area.
And then apply a burning cautery to the patient's legs.
Then apply another treatment to the affected area, which was a surgical procedure involving the use of a cautery.
And if you see that the patient's eyelid is being affected by pain in their body, and apply a cauterization to the area around the wound.
And so raise your leg and hold it still for three days, and another cushion will be placed on it. And if they have a good diet, they will be healthy.
Then, if the condition returns due to some cause, a cushion can be placed under their eyes so they may see clearly what they were initially able to see.
If it's a pain in the eye, another way to say it is "a hot spot."
And so you should use a cautery to treat pain in the legs, and apply heat to the area, which will help reduce the inflammation.
And so you will apply a hot poultice to the area where the patient has a problem with their intestines, and a bandage to their feet.
When joints are infiltrated by pain, it is customary to use a cautery.
Then apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area; if necessary, make use of the hot cautery and cauterize the part.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or other affected areas, the heat must be applied carefully to avoid burning the patient's body.
And put your hand on the patient's thigh to apply medicine.
And this is the way of the myrtle leaf.
And so, you know that the ailments of men are diverse, according to the degree of their magnitude, and yours are called gout because they are small and acute.
The doctors call for the treatment of certain ailments to be learned in this field.
Gout is a disease that affects the joints, and causes pain in the feet, so it is understandable why doctors would be familiar with it.
E si te la ha fatto in lo cielo e la terra.
When you are treating a patient, apply cautery carefully, using the patient's legs to hold their position and avoid accidental burns.
And apply pressure to the affected area using a bandage or poultice.
And if they have a cushion under them, and a pain in their legs.
This is Latin for "which when it has been heated on the fire, will be applied to the body by those who apply cautery to the affected area."
And if you wish, a poultice should be applied to the other leg. And if you want to try, use a cushion.
However, those who work are better off with a cushion under their legs.
Then apply pressure to the leg if it's open. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And then place your hand on the patient's head or chest to prevent them from becoming infected.
At the beginning of the treatment, place your hand on the patient's leg to prevent the cushion from being burned by the cautery.
This patient should be treated for possible gout.
Then place a cushion on the fistulas so that the infection does not reach the legs and spread to the body, as it may be treated by the physician.
If the fistula has been healed, it is necessary to treat the area with fire and cauterize it.
Capitol .xviii. Capital, the patient has been placed on their legs, indicating they need help.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg (or thigh) you place them on the leg.
The patient's lips are affected by pain from a burn.
And since you have opened the space between the legs, and in the legs, there are cushions for the body's humors, which are what is causing the pain.
The patient's legs are being treated for their ailment.
And if there is a need to make incisions in the area where they are needed.
And if the patient has an ailment, apply a poultice to their ailment.
The 19th chapter.
Apply fire to the fistulas in the mouth.
And so if the patient's body is already affected by a disease that causes pain in the joints.
Therefore, if you cauterize the area on the feet, it should be healed.
Line 1: **And here is the chapter on how to apply cauterization.**
This refers to the use of cauterization on swollen gums or ankles.
When the joints are inflamed by their own humors, treat them with cauterization to prevent gout.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop place it over the patient's body.
E already the patient has been treated with a cushion, then put on their chest, and another one their foot.
Chapter 21
This appears to be a heading or title, possibly from a medical text, indicating treatments for toothache.
Then do as you wish with a hot toothache as you have already opened the cavity for the toothache, and if the pain is in the legs, use a cautery to cauterize the affected area.
And if you want to apply cauterization, use a cow's bladder (or hoof) for the best results.
And then apply heat to their feet to treat the pain caused by the cushion.
When a tooth is aching, put a cushion on it, or in other words, apply a poultice to the affected area.
But if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, it is done by placing a cushion under the patient's thighs, so that the cushion will be placed on their legs and they will not feel pain in the joints.
Then apply heat to the affected limb, but be careful that the pain doesn't return to the other limbs.
This one refers to the patient as well, meaning someone who has been afflicted with pain in the body.
And if it is necessary, cauterize the legs.
And this is the way to treat gout.
Another hand should be placed on their limbs, and another cushion should be placed under their feet.
On the treatment of gout.
When you cauterize an affected part, it should be done once, with the patient's consent.
And if the abscess is small, use a cauterization method appropriate for its size.
Then apply the poultice to the patient's legs and treat them with a cautery.
E si es necessitat que lu suo membro sia faydat  (e.g., "and if it is necessary that...")
And apply a cushion to their legs, and another on their arms.
Then if you have a cushion on their legs, you can use another to support the patient's body, but only if necessary.
And if the patient has gout, let your doctor apply a cautery to the affected area.
And cauterize the other, apply the cautery to the neck. And if there's a need to make points on their legs, use another method.
Then apply heat to the affected area, and make sure to keep the patient warm.
Of the twenty-fourth chapter.
Here comes the translation:
Then, if the pain is in the chest and not a result of other ailments, they are likely dealing with an old ailment; you must use two cushions on the area to prevent the inflammation from spreading.
And you should use another cushion on the patient's legs where the incision was made.
E siat la dolor del malaute en la part affected.
And the cautery should be used by the physician in this manner.
Chapter 25.
And if it is necessary to make a point on the leg for the purpose of cauterization.
And if a patient's intestines are outside the body, it is customary to call it a dislocation by the doctors, but they have it wrong.
And thus, the doctor places two cushions under them; one for the legs, and another placed on their chest.
And when the pain is in the feet, apply cautery to the thighs.
And sometimes it's customary for doctors to call it gout when pain occurs in the legs due to the humors being out of balance.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area to soothe them.
And if a cushion is placed on their legs, then the pain in the foot will be felt more intensely.
E aprop apply a cushion to the affected joint, which will be treated with other remedies.
This refers to the stomach and its burning.
Then place cushions on the patient's legs, so that the intestines do not protrude from the body and to prevent the intestines from protruding out through the opening in the wound, the foot should be supported by a cushion.
And adjust the amount of the cautery to the depth of the two known types of gout.
And if you want to know about the treatment for this condition, it's called gout according to this method:
And if it is necessary to make points on the stomach, do so carefully, for you are dealing with a delicate part of the body.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the patient's foot or leg, depending on the location of the affected area, to prevent further complications.
Then apply hot compresses to the patient's feet.
When there is pain in the feet, apply a cautery to their surface.
And if the patient's body has an excess of humors, they are called humors in the legs or other areas.
And do not press your own leg or put it in front of the thigh.
And if there is swelling due to cold, it's called a sickness in the leg joints, which is commonly known as gout.
And in this way, you can use a cautery to treat such ailments with care.
The translation of the given text would be:
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to: Chapter 28.**
The sentence translates to: "And apply the other cushion to the patient's foot."
If there's a wound on the foot that's infected, apply a poultice to dry it out.
The pain is in the tunic and the doctors are called upon to treat it.
This is referring to the treatment of a condition by applying a hot cautery to the area where the affected part is located. And cauterize it with that which is called cautery by those who are skilled in it, or who are accustomed to it.
Then you have cured the other areas already treated.
And if a patient has a condition that requires cauterization, they are familiar with the pain of such a disease; some doctors use this method for other ailments, but not for this one, which they consider too dangerous.
In the 29th chapter.
When using a pointed cautery, they apply heat.
Do this as the ancients did, cauterize their legs according to the way they were treating the sick.
Then apply a heated tool to the affected area, but be careful not to burn the patient's skin.
The patient's legs should be kept still if they are experiencing pain from their own body.
Italians call this "a condition where a person's body is infiltrated by evil humors", but it’s not clear if they are referring to the original source or a new one.
Hands are to be placed under the armpits and the other hand on the chest, which is the location that should be cauterized.
Capitol .xxx. would be translated as **Chapter 30**.
Of the cauterization of the heart.
When you treat a disease in the legs or feet, it is as if you were applying a cauterization with three or four methods.
The man who has been called upon to be a doctor's assistant.
And if you wish to cauterize the legs, the patient has another servant on their legs, which is customary.
E then another way to cauterize, et autra ma be using two methods of cautery.
And if there is a need to apply a cautery to the patient's body for healing purposes, use the appropriate cautery points.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the patient's feet are sore, and place another on their legs.
And so you make four applications with a cautery.
And if you want, apply a cautery to the area of the cavity.
Then, place a hot cautery on the patient's legs so they don't experience further pain.
Capitol thirty-first.
E si se'n va la maladie de l'intestin, a cushion should be placed under the patient's thighs.
Then apply a cushion to their legs and another on their body.
This means that when treating someone with gout you should use cautery on their right leg and apply heat to the affected area. And if a patient has a pain in their feet, hold a hot iron to the affected area.
And if you wish to apply the cautery to the legs or feet, then use a hot iron for a long time.
If there are painful swellings on the joints, especially in the feet, then they will be called "co-existential pain".
Then the patient's chest must be cauterized.
Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, particularly affecting the feet.
Then apply the hot iron to the legs to treat their condition.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, apply the cushion carefully.
Then if it is a burn on their legs or feet it will be painful, but the patient's pain can be treated by cauterization. This passage describes a medical procedure involving the placement of "points" on the body and likely refers to a treatment using a cautery tool.
And you have already treated them for their ailment, which requires long-term care.
Aprofit le forzament.
And if it is necessary to treat the disease of gout by cauterizing the affected joints.
Then apply the cautery to their legs.
Gently warm the area with a cushion to draw out the excess fluids in the abdomen; then use a heated tool to apply heat to the affected area.
Then, if the pain is from a cold humor, you cauterize the area where it is located.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
The treatment for this condition involves applying points using a hot cautery to the affected area.
Then you will be able to apply a cautery to the patient's body for three days.
And if the stomach is cold and they don't digest their food, keep your hand on their stomach for a while, so that the patient will be able to eat again after the treatment.
This line requires more context than is provided.
When you have an infected wound on the foot, apply cautery to the site.
When you apply fire to a part of the body. Then apply an instrument to the area between the thighs.
And if the patient has gout, do it twice over to ensure complete healing.
This text describes the use of a cautery in a medical context.
The text was likely written in Latin and means: **Chapter 36.**
And then apply a cautery to the flesh of the patient's body if they have fistulas.
When nature does not return the intestine to its proper place, the patient's legs will be affected by the pain.
And if you have a wound that is deep in their nature, they will apply a poultice to the depth of the wound and use a cauterization technique.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body, then it's clear that they are in pain from the cold. Then apply a cautery to that area to the patient's thigh, etc., and your hand will hold the other parts in place.
And they apply cautery to the affected areas as needed.
When there is pain in the legs or feet, treat the patient with a poultice made of herbs, not fire.
Then put your hand on their leg to prevent further inflammation.
When the patient is healed, lahoras is completely cured.
And if they are affected by gout, it is another way to say that the patient's body fluids are out of balance.
When there are no humor-related ailments present, it is customarily called a healthy condition.
The use of cauterization on wounds.
When there are pains in the thighs, it's best to treat them with a poultice and a bandage.
This means that the doctors are using a heated cautery tool to apply three cauterizations in the area where the patient's legs have been affected by the ailment.
Capitol .xxxviii.  - **Chapter 38.**
When the patient has pain in the bladder, but it's unclear if it's from the bladder itself or something else.
Then place the other [hot] hand on them, e's in the bladder to relieve the symptoms and prevent further complications.
Burn that in proportion to the size of the burn on the patient's body.
E sia le mas pain in la reduccion de la sua cavity.
E si es ja  is a term for "And if it is" in Latin-like languages.
And so apply the other cushion.
And so for the good of the health of the patient, three cushions are used to treat the area around it.
The title "Capitol .xl." likely refers to Chapter 40.
On their knees.
When there are signs of a cold nature in the body, it is customary to call it gout. And the patient is usually treated for gout in their legs.
Then, as a precaution, place the cushion under the patient's body.
And if you are applying a cautery to the leg, do so carefully.
And if you are not able to be present, then another should cauterize the area.
And if a burn occurs on the surface of the foot, apply cauterization to prevent the spread of the disease.
Chapter xli.
This is the treatment for the pain in the thighs.
A physician should be consulted if the condition persists or worsens.
The manner of using a cautery on a patient is determined by whether it's used with hot or cold treatment methods.
The patient has been treated by learned doctors with three different methods. "Then treat the area with a hot iron to apply heat to a specific part of the body."
Mays in some cases there are other causes.
And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the area around the legs, to prevent the pain from spreading to the rest of the body.
And if pain is felt in the legs, that is what doctors call sciatica.
The pain extends from the leg to the chest; this is the meaning of the term "gout" in the context of the provided text.
And if the patient has been afflicted by the ailment, they are treated with cauterization.
And then apply cautery to the affected area.
When pain affects the whole body, the following are used to treat it: a poultice on the thighs, a cushion under them, cupping therapy, and other treatments for gout are applied.
And if you have a cushion put under them, the patient's pain should be checked.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, the patient will feel pain in the area that is being cauterized, and they will experience swelling and burning sensations. And then apply a cold poultice to the abdomen, and keep the patient's belly cool, while another poultice should be applied on their feet.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each part as follows.
When they are wise doctors, they use their hands for treatment.
And you have already opened the intestine, which is a cushion for the knee, in that circle.
The text describes a medical procedure where the patient's body is being positioned for a treatment involving cauterization. And so place a cushion on their legs if they have to be cauterized.
And leave the patient's body to be treated for three days; then leave him in the open air.
This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess:
When a doctor diagnoses a patient with a pain caused by cold humors in the leg, they would call it a case of "Mays" (meaning "May" in Latin).
Mays cauteri are medicines that have stuck to their two-nut theory.
Then return to the patient's body, and another cushion should be placed under it.
And if the patient has been struck by the gout, apply hot water to the affected area and gently place the two circles on the leg.
Then place your hand on the patient's affected area.
And if the intestine or hernia has been removed from the patient's thighs, it must be put back in place for three days.
And then they will treat the area where the pain is located.
And then cauterize the area affected by the gout in the way that was done to the patient's legs, and if the pain is widespread throughout the body, use a cushion on the body, and cauterize it according to the same method as used for the foot.
This refers to the way in which medicines are applied in the treatment. When preparing medicine for the patient's illness, use a cushion to treat it.
And you place a cushion on their foot to prevent the water from becoming too acidic and causing pain.
And holding their thighs, put your hand on the patient's body, where the artery is located, to stop the bleeding.
And apply heat to the affected area with a heated tool.
And if a man suffers from sciatica, apply a cautery to his legs and apply pressure to prevent it from spreading.
And if you are to apply the cauterization, use a fresh, pointed cushion, and apply it carefully where the pain is located in the foot.
And so it is that the pain of a few hours ago in the case of the patient, it was called gout.
And so the body should be treated, and a poultice applied to the affected area, while others help the patient by keeping them warm.
Then, you should know that the patient's body will be better served by these medicines if they are applied to the affected area.
And if you want to know how to treat a patient's gout using a pointed cautery, then proceed as follows:
Then apply heat to their legs and use charcoal to cauterize it. And if you find that the patient's legs are affected by humors, you must use your skill to prevent them from being affected further.
This is the method of applying cauterization to the body.
When pain in the feet is caused by an imbalance of humors, they are treated differently by doctors depending on the specific type of humor causing the pain, and if a patient has swelling in their feet (or ankles), which is usually treated with cold applications.
Of the legs, leg pain.
Some people experience pain in the area where their pain is located, they are told that it is called gout by doctors.
And then you cauterize the legs, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if it is customarily to do a cauterization of the knees, thighs, and arms.
And here is already a cushion placed upon their legs.
When you have a hot iron on the body, then this is the way to treat them with a cushion.
The text says: **Chapter 43.**
From the use of the word "cauterizacio" in Translation 2, I'd guess:
This sentence describes the use of a cushion in a medical context for treating someone suffering from gout.
And if you are concerned about gout in the legs, it is customary to apply a cushion to the area.
And so when you apply a cautery to the limbs of a person who has been diagnosed with gout, it is customary to treat them as if they have a problem in the intestine. Then apply a cushion on their feet, another on their legs, and treat them for their condition.
And if you want to treat a painful condition in their foot or feet, cauterize the area. The pain is caused by the body's humors.
Then apply the cautery to the area we have mentioned.
And then if the pain is caused by other things besides the nerves you might apply cautery.
Chapter xliv.
This could be a treatment for pain in the joints, particularly the feet.
And if there is an accumulation of cold humors, it is called gout by doctors.
And therefore, if they are cured by the application of heat to the affected area, then the doctors will say that it is a cure for the pain in the legs, which is also called gout.
And if you need to cauterize something, use a tool specifically designed for cauterizing the legs.
This sentence means something along the lines of "And if the patient's body has a fever" or "When there are pains in the feet, it is called..."
When necessary, make points on the legs and feet. And if pain arises in the joints of the body, then treat them with a cushion or oil.
And if it is necessary to burn the skin, the tools needed for the procedure are applied.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs.
Then return to the patient's body and apply cautery as needed.
Then apply it to the points on the feet and legs.
And if the doctors are able to make the patient's pain go away.
G: When the patient has a good constitution and is treated with medicines, it is said to be a cure for those who can afford it.
This is likely a chapter heading, indicating the start of Chapter 45.
This is the section on applying cauterization for various conditions.
...the patient's joints are called gout.
And if you wish to follow the patient's health, another servant should be placed on their feet.
And if a patient has gout, apply the cauterization on their legs.
And then if he has an opening made in his leg by the other.
It is said that the patient has been given a cushion to rest their legs. And if your hand is already on their legs, then apply another cushion to the area.
When the pain is in the feet, the patient's legs are placed on a cushion.
And then put your hand on the cautery and apply it to the affected area.
Then, if needed, apply cautery to the area to prevent further complications.
When you have to make an incision on the bone, use a different cautery.
And if the pain affects the children's legs, then apply the cauterization to them.
E aproc le cura un loc e aprop has to be treated for three days with a cauterizing tool.
And if the patient has a fever, it should be treated with other remedies.
And if there are other conditions that cause pain in the body, and then seal it.
And so that the patient's belly doesn't get too much effort, one should place a cushion on their legs.
And if one wants to open the space between the legs, it should be done gently, so as not to cause pain.
And you must use this treatment for those who have diseases in their legs, which are treated by using this other treatment.
And so you cauterize the intestine of the patient with a cushion, then apply a cautery to the lower abdomen, and another cushion on their chest for that part of the body.
And if it is necessary to treat something in the intestines.
And that's how the doctors are supposed to be able to keep the intestine from being affected by the condition.
Capitol forty-six.
When there is pain in the patient's feet, then use a cautery on them.
Then you must treat the pain with another cautery.
And if a patient has an inflamed intestine, it is customary to treat them with cautery.
When pain persists, use a different cautery.
The text likely describes the use of cauterization as a treatment for injuries or ailments related to the legs and feet.
And apply another cautery to their legs (or other appropriate areas).
Then you have to place a poultice on their legs for treatment.
Then apply heat to the affected area: on the back of the head, where you applied the cushion for the patient’s cap or use your hand to hold the cushion in place as needed.
And finally, the patient's legs are being held open by the doctor, who wants to cauterize the area.
And if you want to treat the affected part, use a hot cautery on all the bones of the foot.
And if you wish to avoid the nerves that are already burned, it is important to be careful.
E alcunas upon the other bones are placed on the legs, and so forth.
And if a patient has pain in the thighs, then doctors use a cautery on them, for example, for other reasons on their feet, as they are numbed by the pain of the joints.
And if there are few or many burns on the body, another burn is applied to the foot, but the other burns are used to treat the intestines and another for their feet.
Then place your hand upon their legs and apply other remedies as needed.
Chapter 48.
Then use a hot iron to apply heat to the patient's legs.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
The patient has a cautery applied to their leg. And then apply ointment to the patient's legs and elsewhere so that their ailment is healed.
And if there are some wounds on the legs and they are caused by other things, then those wounds should be cauterized.
This is the first known instance of the phrase "Mays no prusuma" appearing in English.
Gout is a disease that causes pain in the joints, particularly in the feet.
And apply the cautery directly to the skin, but only on the areas that are affected by humors and need to be treated.
Then apply the medicine to the affected area, and adjust its potency accordingly.
And if you are already a skilled surgeon, then apply the appropriate treatment to that vein.
Capitol I
The patient's condition should be treated carefully with a hot compress.
And if it is cancer, then treat it with cautery.
And if it is not necessary to cauterize the leg, then they should be treated as they are now.
And if you have already applied a cautery to the affected area, as we previously mentioned.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary, the patient's pain should be treated with a cautery tool.
Then apply a hot poker to the affected area.
Then apply the cushion to their legs, and if necessary, use another method to treat them.
And if there are hot humors in the body, then so be it; that's what healthy people apply to their bodies when they are experiencing pain.
If there are pains in the body which are caused by the coldness of the humors, they are called gout.
And then apply a cautery to the corrosive parts.
You can't use a cushion to prevent the effects of dry rot in wood.
Therefore, apply heat to the area, but only after using a cautery.
Then apply cautery to eradicate the inflammation from all parts of the body.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area and let the patient's legs be exposed to the heat for three days, after which the pain will subside.
And apply a cushion to their legs.
Then apply the cautery to the area again, because it is customary for that ailment.
And if the patient has been affected by gout, apply cushion to the legs. And yet, burning with fire should be done lightly.
And so I have said that the cure for humors in the feet is to cauterize them.
When the intestine has been treated with medicinal remedies, the patient's feet are often treated with a hot cautery to draw out the toxins.
This refers to a cautery treatment on the legs, and other similar treatments.
And if the patient suffers from pain caused by a hot iron brand, then it's called calciprophylaxis.
You've already cauterized the patient's legs, so you should apply a poultice to the cushion on their legs.
And then place a cushion on their hand, and put your hand on their foot. And let it stay in that condition for three days. Then apply a poultice of wild leek poultice to the patient's legs and apply another to their feet, holding the wound open for the fluids to drain freely.
And then apply the balm to the place where they are injured so that the flesh may be healed.
And so you have to apply the cautery on the foot for a whole hour, or at least for half an hour on each side of the body, if you need to use the cautery.
And then hold your hand on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
And place a cushion under them, so that their feet are warmed.
The text reads: "When there are 53 chapters, it's customary to call them by that name".
This could be used to describe the treatment for a condition similar to tremor in modern medicine.
Quan endeve the patient to be treated with four applications of cautery, use a cushion for the stomach; the other two are used on their legs and hands.
And if the patient's hands tremble, it is a sign that they have a tremor in their body due to illness.
Capitol 51.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's body, and use a hot cautery.
The patient's leg is to be treated as if it were already opened up in surgery, or with another herb which is known for its healing properties.
Then apply heat to the foot, and use a hot cautery for the expulsion of the humors.
Mays, therefore, treatment by evacuation of the blood is performed with a special tool used for that purpose.
Capitol LVI.
The patient should only be treated with a cushion for cushioning during an arrow wound.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the wound on the leg, lest the plague return.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to a cushion or other such object on the patient's body, so place it under their arm, where the pain is felt.
And if it is necessary to stop the flow of blood, the physician should be consulted.
And then put a hot iron on the affected area to help alleviate the pain.
Then if the blood is infected in the foot, apply a cautery to the affected area, so they may be burned.
Then be careful to avoid burning the nerves that are here on the patient, which are already vulnerable.
E sapias que lesa’s de lu, another person who has knowledge of the proper treatment can be applied to prevent further complications.
And if it is a cushion that causes the pain to be felt in the legs, and the patient has a fever.
Then you have to use a hot needle to treat them.
Doctors use these methods to treat the legs and feet:  cauterization.
Then place a cushion on their legs to support them in case of pain.
Then we will discuss in this chapter the treatment for those who wish to be relieved from pain in this area.
Then you will learn about cautery in this chapter, which is on the patient's leg, and others are discussed in the first chapter.
This sentence appears to be about treating gout in medieval times. And he will be treated with the care that his condition requires.
And place a bandage on their feet to prevent the intestine from being injured. And if the disease is severe and lasts for a long time, it is said that death is near.
And if it is a pernicious disease that affects the foot, it is not a true gout.
Aprop be the person who has the right to be treated by doctors for gout.
And place your hand on the patient to aid them in their diagnosis and treatment.
And if you are to cauterize, a cushion should be placed under their body for protection, so they don't feel pain in their legs or feet.
And if you are using a cushion for pain relief, it will be placed on your legs and another will be placed on their feet and they will have a cushion to support them.
Chapter one.
And so apply cautery to the child's legs
You are correct that the text describes a medical procedure involving the use of cauteries to treat an illness caused by excess humors in the body.
and if it is caused by an unseen or hidden cause.
And if I don't see the child's illness as a cushion under their legs.
And if you have placed a cushion under them.
And if the physician needs to apply heat to the patient's body, they should be careful that the heat doesn't affect the cushion's placement on the legs.
When the pain is in the leg, you must make points on the legs, and other uses for it are already known.
And so if the humor is more severe and there is greater inflammation, the doctors will cauterize it, so place the cushion on their legs.
When the body's heat is blocked from the bone, it is a cushion that will be placed on the affected area between the thighs, as the doctor already has access to the legs through the space between the feet and the thigh. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then treat it with a hot cushion.
And if a hot iron is applied to the body's wounds, then apply a dry cloth on top and use oil and cloths to treat the wound.
E si es autra cushion to apply to the foot.
And place a cushion on their legs, to cause the evacuation of fluids from their body.
The second chapter begins.
When applied to the feet or legs, these medicines are effective against gout.
And thus, if you cauterize the veins of the patient in such a way that the skin is roughened by the heat from the burning, then they will be able to tell which parts are affected and where the pain is strongest.
Then place a cushion on their other side, and let them be in good health.
And when you do this, if the patient is willing, use a needle to draw blood from the affected area, and remove the blood from the cavity using a lancet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area, apply the cautery frequently to the affected veins.
And if the patient's body doesn't reject the arrow, then you should apply a cushion to their chest and use a tool called a 'cupping glass' to remove the cushion from the foot.
And if it is necessary to draw blood from the leg, it is the same as drawing blood from another vein elsewhere in the body.
And another considers the plague, and thus they call upon their knowledge to treat it.
And you will strengthen the patient's health by using cloth bandages.
E.g.,
This refers to a treatment for pain in the temples.
Gout is treated by applying heat to the affected area.
The method of the operation involves placing a cushion under the patient's head to protect them from the pain.
And if it is a case of gout, the pain is treated with a cushion under their legs to soften the area. And if it is necessary to open the patient's legs, the physician will apply his hand to them. This text describes how to use a cushion to relieve pain caused by an imbalance of humors in the feet.
And if it is a wound that needs to be cauterized, it is necessary to know what part of the body is affected.
And if you are trying to remove the poison from the patient's body, use a hot cushion.
And if the pain is severe, apply a strong bandage to the wound after cauterization.
And apply cautery to the excess that is in the joints; and do not perform the operation at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that which is in need of cauterization with a cautery, and another on their legs, and another on their arms.
And if the foot is affected by cold humors, the doctor will use a cautery to treat it.
And if you are unable to do so, it is advisable to apply a dry cautery to prevent further complications.
Then if blood flows freely from the wound you must place your hand on their chest. And if there are no current signs of inflammation, hold the heat to the affected area as a treatment.
E if you apply two hot coals to the body,  it’s possible that there will be a second, less painful use of the cushion for padding.
This is the form of the cautery.
And apply the cauteries on both sides of the body. And yet, use the cauterization tool to burn away the excess heat.
So when the disease flares up, use a cauterization to stop the pain.
And this work is best done with light touch.
Then if necessary, apply a cautery to the area between the thighs, and place one on their legs, and another on their feet, so that there's no further swelling.
Chapter four.
This refers to the use of cautery in treating foot pain caused by an imbalance of humors.
And so, when one applies a poultice to the affected areas, the doctors say it's a poultice for healing.
And if you are treating a hernia on someone's forehead, place a cushion to protect it. And if there are two fingers on their legs, use one cushion for the other to hold in place.
And to be careful, when cutting into the area of the groin, to make sure the incision doesn't extend to the other side of the body, and to keep the wound clean. And if there are wounds on the legs, they should be cauterized.
And if you're treating a patient, dry their foot by placing a cushion on them.
You have already treated the patient's legs with cushions, which is what you would do for someone suffering from gout. This is the part that needs to be heated up. Apply heat to that area, but only if the patient can withstand another incision on the leg. And then place the pointed instrument on the other side of the patient’s body from the cushion.
Another way to say that the patient has a pain in their legs is for them to call it a lion's paw.
This is an example of a medical treatise that uses Latin-like terminology to describe a treatment for gout.
Another person should apply pressure to the patient's legs while a cushion is placed on their knee.
Then apply cold to the affected areas, and prevent the formation of other inflammations.
And on the third day apply cold water to the intestine or hernia to prevent further injury.
And then apply the cupping glass to their legs.
> This could refer to a type of treatment applied to the head using a cauterizing tool.
When there are painful attacks in the legs, which are caused by a burning sensation in the joints from an excess of humors, it is customary to call them gout.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's mouth (to make a cauterization) and another to the foot, which has been placed upon the cushion.
Dry the blood from the wound with a clean rag, and bandage it with dry gauze or cloth. Place a cushion under their feet.
Then apply a poultice of dried wheat bran to the affected areas.
This section describes how to treat a patient with a painful condition that causes pain in the limbs due to an imbalance of humors, which is why the text is presented as it is.
This refers to the treatment of the patient's ears.
So there are four causes of pain in the legs: such as if it is due to mineral or something similar to a stone, such as gravel or a lump of rock.
And if the cause is due to other causes than those of the foot pain, then they are to be treated accordingly. And another should be placed on their chest, covered by a cushion, if there are other causes for the pain in the foot.
And if it is not gout, the instrument is used in a similar way to other instruments.
Then let them be treated with a cautery of thinness.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, it is necessary to do so in a way that prevents the patient from being burned by the hot iron. Then apply cautery to the area with a special instrument designed for that purpose.
Then it's possible to put the patient's body in its proper place. And then apply a dry cautery to the foot for the pain.
This sentence is in a language similar to Catalan, which you've correctly identified as being close to Latin.
Then put your hand on the area of the wound to hold the intestine in place. Then if it is an infected fissure, treat it carefully with a cushion that matches the affected area.
And if you are administering a cure to him/her, give them a thin cushion on their head. Then administer to them the following remedies:
And if you think that the patient's body is already moistened by the vapors of the laurel leaves, which are also known as the oil of the bay laurel tree, then you should apply this to their legs, put them in a place where they can be put back into place.
Mays no, the patient is being treated with leeches on their legs, and something else is placed upon their legs and they are healed by the cautery and heated stones. And if you're going to cauterize the body, make sure to avoid the bad parts.
And if you're going to cauterize the body, make sure to avoid the bad parts. The first part of the body to be affected by gout is typically the feet.
And if there are too many gout attacks, put a cauterizing tool on their legs and so forth.
Then cure the pain in their leg by applying the remedy to the affected area, as previously discussed.
Apos le dolor de la malaute, treat the affected area with a cushion.
And if you want to take a chance on something happening, or if you are concerned about a possible cause of illness, use a wide gauge needle, but if there is no concern for worms, use a fine one. And if you are to make an incision on the affected joint.
Mays si no ait (And if it is not) ... you will be able to find the text in the explanation below.
And if it is in your body, you have to cauterize it, which is why the doctors are using this instrument. Make a cushion, which is placed on the legs, silver or bronze.
And then place your hand on their legs so they don't come out. And if you want to apply a poultice of some kind to the patient’s thighs, use a poultice of some kind of herb — and that applies to a cushion for the pain — for the treatment.
And when it is necessary to treat with a hot cautery, use a small one. And if the patient has too much pain in the ear, use medicine to treat them.
Chapter 7
And when it is necessary to cauterize ears.
Then, if there's a need to make points on the body, they should be done on the outside, in the area around the abdomen, but never directly on the stomach or feet.
Then apply the cushion to the affected area.
When you apply heat to the affected area, the patient's body should be held still. And so if you see signs of the illness in their body, open the affected area with a fine cautery.
And if it is necessary to put your hand on the body of the patient, you should apply heat to their thighs.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's bowels and place your hand on their body.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's foot a little.
Et autre se serve te, which means "And then take care" in English.
And if you are applying a poultice to the patient's foot, place it on the affected area and apply it to the location of the wound.
This indicates that the text describes how to treat a condition involving blood flow, likely using cautery, and is referring to a specific treatment for gout mentioned in a medical treatise.
Chapter 8.
For the treatment of the ailment called Athezile, which is to be treated with cautery on the eyes.
Some doctors believe that the eyes are affected by cold humors in the same way as other parts of the body, but it can be used to treat them.
Then he said: "Therefore, if the pain is in the foot, it is customary to apply cautery to the affected area."
When it comes to joint pain, we'll use the fine cautery on the smaller bones.
When there is a need to perform surgery, the best method would be to apply cautery to the affected area.
This document discusses the intestine or the body parts that are affected by them.
Then apply a cushion to their eyes.
The patient's illness is caused by some cause, which is called a stye.
Another person places the patient's legs on their chest and waits for the next step.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's body, you should do so by placing the hot iron on the affected area to prevent the spread of the disease.
Thus, when the pain is in the legs, it is said to be another person's legs.
And if the pain is in the legs, you adjust it with a bandage, and another that heals.
Then if there is little pain, no cushion will be needed.
And if a cautery has been used on their foot, they are experiencing pain in the place where you burned them.
And if it is necessary to make incisions, you should do so after applying a cushion soaked in salt water (salve) to their legs.
Chapter 10.
And so, if the pain persists in the legs, apply a hot cautery to the area.
Train your skills in medicine and treat the sick with cushions to soothe their pain and care for the rest of their ailments.
And if you press their eyelids, they feel the pain in their feet from the cushion that is placed there.
And if you want to heal the patient, they should be given a hot compress to relieve their pain.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the whole body, make sure the patient's body is completely covered in cushions so as not to be burned.
And if there's pain in the body, apply that to the areas where the pain is felt.
And see that you do not disturb the area where the blood vessels are located, as they will be affected by the pain.
When a fissure occurs in your body you can use a hot iron to cauterize it.
And if it is necessary to put one's hands on their legs, it is so they may be held in place.
Then apply your hand to the affected joint.
When sores are treated, the patient's pain will subside.
Chapter 11
Of those who have been wounded, they are burned in the following manner: by using a cautery tool, the wound is carefully sealed off to prevent further bleeding.
When in the eyelids there are natural inflammations or other diseases, which cause pain in the eye, it's called *huel* by doctors.
Therefore, if you have a wound on your foot, the doctor will apply the cushion to the right place.
And so if the patient has pain in their legs, the one who is applying the treatment should apply the cushion to the area.
Then, if the patient has a condition where the body's humors are causing them to be inflamed, you may need to use a cushion to treat it.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to draw out the smaller humors that are causing the pain. And then place a cushion under their feet.
Then burn the cushions on the patient's thighs to reduce swelling, if necessary, by using lancets.
And if the pain has subsided, the surgeon should remove the points.
And if you cure the bowels, you should dry them with sutures.
But if it is necessary to cauterize him, he should be treated without fear.
And if it is necessary, use a different method to treat the pain in their feet, such as applying a poultice made of myrtle leaves to reduce swelling.
Then you must place a cautery on their legs to prevent further complications.
And if it is necessary to suture the opening or treat it with a cautery, do so carefully.
If you have an abscess, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And sometimes to the eyes that are affected by the disease, he should apply the cautery to those areas, which are the usual ones for the surgeon to use.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area, avoiding any contact with the bone. And you must place two cushions under the patient's legs to support their feet. And you have already made incisions in the patient's limbs.
And if the patient has an excess of humor in their eye, the doctor will use a cushion to treat them for a short time, because gout is caused by an imbalance of humors.
Mays es tardat, the patient's body should be treated by now applying a cautery to their legs.
Therefore, when the body is afflicted with the disease of gout, apply your hand to their feet.
And then make sure the person has no pain in the legs, and only apply cauterization to the body in this manner: And if it is the intestine or other bodily fluids that are causing the pain.
Another person would be required to hold the patient's legs apart during this process.
When it is necessary to apply a needle to the patient's foot.
If there are pains in your feet caused by humors, you should treat them gently. And let the cushion be placed on the leg for pain relief.
Then use the cauterization tool to apply heat to the affected area on the legs to prevent the ailment from spreading.
And the patient's ailment be relieved by a subtle operation, and by another on their legs.
And so the cushion is used to push the needle into the affected area.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
Then treat the patient with a poultice for their ailment.
Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
And thus you would apply the cushion to the patient's legs, keeping the body warm and covered.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, adjust the cushion under them.
The text describes the process of using a cautery tool to treat a patient by cauterizing the area where their pain is located.
When a treatment for the eyes is applied to the eyelid, it is called a poultice.
When the doctors call it leucorrhea.
The method to treat an infected wound in the foot is to apply a poultice, and if the infection has spread, use a poultice to separate the lips and draw out the inflammation.
The cushion should be placed on the legs to make the patient's legs feel less pain.
Usa a warm water for cold humors that affect the legs or feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, it is important for you to apply your knowledge of cushions and cushions correctly so that the wound does not burst open.
And if the person needs to be cauterized, place your hand on the affected area to prevent further complications.
Chapter 14.
Another example of a condition that affects the body:
This is a true case of a disease called true gout, which can be caused by the following.
Then use a cushion or cushion to hold their thighs, and other help for their legs and feet.
The first one that is already mentioned in the text is to use a cautery for treatment.
Then apply a cautery to open the body in their place. And then place a cushion on the patient's feet to keep them warm.
The patient's body should be covered with a cloth when the pain is caused by the abdomen.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their legs, it is called the “landa.”
And if it is necessary to drain the humor from the body, apply a poultice.
Apply these remedies to treat the affected area.
And if there are no other signs of injury on the leg, except for the opening of the cushion. And if it is necessary to separate the skin from the lips as we have said.
And the treatment for the disease of the thighs is based on the patient's condition, and they are treated accordingly.
And if the pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to use cautery, which must be applied in various ways depending on the situation.
Chapter 15.
The doctors were using their hands to hold the patient's body in place while cauterizing.
Then apply the poultice to the affected eyelid; if you need to do so, apply a cautery to the area below the eye socket, and elevate the cautery above it.
And place a small cushion under the patient's hands to prevent them from feeling the pain of the procedure.
When there is a need for bloodletting, but only if the patient has agreed to it, apply leeches to the affected area.
Then place a cushion under them, and hold their hands so they don't feel pain from gout or other ailments.
And then apply a bandage to the eye after cauterizing to prevent gout from emerging in the foot.
Chapter 16
Of which, when the pain is from the cold humors in the foot, treat it as such.
Then it is clear that the pain is caused by a cushion placed under the patient's legs, which are already in their place.
Both types of tears are used to treat the eyes.
If a patient has a swelling in their foot, they should be treated with a hot cautery, which can also be done for other conditions. You have already opened the thigh and made it clear that you are using a hot needle to apply a poultice or compress. And then you should cauterize that part of the body.
Then apply a cautery to the legs of the patient, carefully avoiding the area where the blood flows.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to a patient's legs or feet, it is customary for the physician to use an instrument to do so.
And take care that the wound does not touch the cornea, and if there is pain, apply another cushion to their pupil for support.
A "diferent" method of treatment for a "sinal" in the foot would be used.
And if you cannot return the nail to its opening by usual methods, use medicinals to help heal it.
And if you wish to cauterize it, apply the fine needle carefully. This refers to something subtle or nuanced. Then if you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and put the cushion there, it will be a rare occasion for the pain to return to the patient's body.
And then put another application of the cautery on the patient's legs, so that the pain does not return, and if there is no other treatment for them, they can be treated by applying a hot cautery to the area.
And then place another cushion on their legs, and you must do something to their feet.
Take care of the tear duct, lest it be damaged.
And then apply a cushion to their eyes and another to their feet.
"Another hand on the foot," they said.
And so apply the cautery to the patient's foot.
The patient's eyelids are affected by a cushion-like object.
The patient has suffered from gout, which is why doctors call this condition the same thing as what they treat.
And you will have made a puncture, in the same way as doctors do when they make a puncture on the foot, they are also called the thigh and the knee joint.
Then use salt to treat the pain, but don’t apply it directly to the affected area, instead use a hot cautery on the area that causes the pain.
And if the cause of the pain in the foot persists, then apply cauteri again on the legs to relieve the pain.
Then, however, if a doctor wants to treat you, they will cauterize your body, intentionally or unintentionally.
Eighteenth
Of the gathering of the humors in le body.
When you see a patient with stiff legs, they should be treated by a doctor.
Therefore, first you must consider if the pain in the affected area is due to gout or other causes.
And place your hand on their head to guide them.
And thus you have two cushions already placed upon their legs, and the humors are extracted.
Then cauterize with care.
And be careful that you don't burn the skin when treating for gout.
Then apply a cushion to their belly to stop the intestines from being opened up.
If the patient's intestines are affected by the pain, then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is felt in their intestines, and place a cushion on their feet so that the body does not move from under the blanket.
And so he treated the patient in the same way.
And this is the form of the scissors.
Chapter .xix.
A la sua natura, the patient will be known as suffering from arthritis.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area to dry it out.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has a dark discoloration, it is necessary to use a tool for this purpose.
And if there are sharp pains in the legs or feet, they are caused by the other humors, which I will explain later.
Then, on their bones, apply a cushion to those positions where they are experiencing pain and swelling.
And then apply a hot cautery to their legs, which can be done in several ways.
And if the patient's illness is caused by cold humors that have left the body, you will already know they are cured.
And if you have not been able to find relief from the pain through other means, then it’s time for cauterization, but be careful to keep your hands away from the affected area unless you want them burned.
The patient is weakened by the use of a cushion on their feet, but they may have other ailments.
And then apply a hot cautery to the bones and joints.
Thus, the proper treatment for such pain is to apply heat and medicines.
The patient should be treated carefully so that no harm comes to the body.
Capitol .xx. means Chapter 20. This is likely a chapter title or reference to a specific chapter in the text.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the feet, the patient must be treated with care.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
Then fold a cushion four times in the manner of the four folds of a linen bandage; and thus apply it to the patient's legs.
Then place the other foot on the other leg if necessary. And apply cups to the patient's legs to draw out the illness.
Then if the ligament has been torn, it is important to apply a straight cautery.
And then if you wish to apply cautery, you must do so only at night.
If the patient's bowels are too inflamed, or if the humors are still coming out, continue to apply the cushion to their legs and hands, keeping them raised until the treatment subsides.
Chapter .xxi.
Then apply a hot cautery to the swelling in the legs due to the patient's condition, as they are the ones who should be using them.
And so, if a surgeon needs to perform surgery on the patient's thighs, they are the ones who will make the incision, and the surgeon must hold the patient's feet and hands in place.
Then place another cushion on the wound, to soothe the pain.
And so you'll alleviate the pain in the limbs, allowing for comfort as the plague is healed.
And sometimes it is necessary to apply a cushion to the affected area.
The patient's legs are already open and the physician is tending to them.
Another one that is necessary for the patient's health is that they be treated by a skilled practitioner.
This means treatment for gout.
This disease is customarily called gout, but it's not water that flows down.
And if you see a patient suffering from gout, make them avoid anything that causes pain to the affected joint.
And if it doesn't descend in the leg, you should know it's gout.
When you see that the patient's legs are thin and weak, then apply a bandage to the leg, and place your hand on the area where the pain is located.
Therefore, if you have already opened the body's humors, a cushion should be placed on the legs to prevent them from being affected by cold or heat.
And if it is treated, then it will heal.
Another way to say “Then” is "And so".
This refers to treatment for a medical condition, likely related to a wound or injury on the leg.
The first sentence refers to the patient's condition as a whole.
Then use a cushion to protect the patient's hands from the heat.
And if the pain is in the left eye, use a cautery on the body part below the eye.
and then place a cushion under your right foot, you must apply a cushion to their legs if the left leg is weakened.
And if the pain is in the big toe, then use a hot poultice on the affected area.
Then place your hand on the foot to prevent a further outbreak of pain.
When you are experiencing pain in the foot, you must be careful not to cause injury to the patient's body.
And if you can't see the patient's pain, then treat the affected area.
Therefore, if you are able to put back the intestine or hernia into place, apply your hand on their area to prevent the patient from being touched.
And so when the body is dry or the pain appears in the foot, the patient must be treated with a bandage on their feet and a hot iron to the affected area.
May the foot be treated with poultices for its pain.
And if you don't have an exact understanding of your patient's condition — which may be gout —, then use a cushion to apply pressure to the area of the affected foot.
And therefore, you should apply a poultice to that area for healing that ailment, but be careful not to burn them with the hot cautery.
And then apply another cautery to the affected area.
When you are treating a patient for pain in the legs, apply a cushion to their hands when they're held by the doctor.
And apply the cautery to the body only as needed.
And if the patient's body is so disposed, it will be on their knees.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area, and make sure the patient's legs are covered.
And then apply heat to the legs, but not too much as to cause further inflammation. And if you have to draw it back, do so gently because the patient has a weak constitution.
If it is necessary to correct the position of the intestine or a boil on the patient's body, then you have to use a cushion for the boil and another for the bowels.
When it is open to the sight of you, it will be a pain that exists on your feet, but it is in its place.
et galdament you have already made an incision in the patient's legs.
A student is not excused from being present in the operating room when a patient has a surgery.
And so if the fire has already burned the foot, we must use a cushion to stop the inflammation.
And perhaps you have seen it happen in our land, where it is said to be a new development.
And these are the types of species that are known as magdaan in the medical field.
When translated literally, the text reads: "And if they are thin-skinned, these should be called humors."
The chapter containing the text begins with the word "Capitol" and ends with the phrase "et cetera."
Then comes the treatment of flesh that bleeds.
This describes other methods used to treat wounds, such as those resembling scorpion stings or a polyp. And if it is a tumor, and not a mole, that appears on the flesh, then it is a cancer.
Therefore, you should use a cushion for support under the body. Then you should use a cushion to apply pressure to the joint and have them rest. This is a bad sign if you have sores on your legs, so you should seek a physician's help immediately.
Then place a cushion on their nose, then use a cautery to prevent the disease from spreading. Mays si the nose has been opened and the vapors have entered the palate.
And if the fluid does not spread to the legs as it should, a cushion is placed on the leg bones by the doctor.
So, when a patient has a problem, such as a swelling in their feet caused by something other than gout, it is customary to apply cushions to prevent the swelling from worsening.
And since the patient's body has gout, it is necessary to treat him with a cautery.
You have already opened the door for the patient to have their intestine or cavity treated by another's hand.
And if it is necessary to drain the phlegm from the patient's body through the use of a poultice, put a cushion on their legs.
Then apply a lead cushion to the patient's body until they are healed.
Then, if healing is needed, use a cautery to treat the patient.
E aquesta, in this context, seems to mean "and this" or "this is the way". So, the full phrase might be translated as:
And keep a cushion under the legs to prevent pain from spreading.
If you want to make a wound on the leg, use a canula (a small tube) to apply heat and draw out the impurities from the body through the blood vessels.
Chapter 25.
And if you want to cauterize the eye, do so around the area around the eyes.
They are applying a cautery to the patient's legs for treatment.
And if you wish to be safe from the risk of being injured by sharp tools, you should make sure your hands are free from the ailment. And you will use a cushion to soothe the pain.
Then you may apply a treatment to the affected area.
Then apply fire to the wound to cauterize it.
E aprop reduce la cosa on the other side, e use the other cushion to apply heat.
And if you have already used the pointed cautery on the lips or the ear, and another one is placed on the lips and another one on the lips and another one on the lip.
You know that in a few such cases, the surgeon will use cautery.
And when you have treated the wound on the leg, then apply a cushion to the patient's foot, and hold the patient's hands still.
And if the patient's lips are already healed, then leave the wounds alone, for they are healed, but if the pain is in their legs, place a cushion on them, and if the pain is elsewhere, don’t touch the sore spots. Then apply sutures to the edges of the wound.
When there is pain in the joints, they say it's a special case of that ailment.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected joint.
When there is an accumulation of humors in the two lips (of the mouth) that cause pain, it is customary for doctors to call it a cold humor.
The patient's feet are treated by applying cushions to them.
And if you want to treat those areas that are stiffened by joint pain and inflammation, then apply a cushion, and use a tool for the other pains in the legs and feet.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
"This is" likely refers to a description of something related to the gums, such as pain or swelling.
A large number of these wounds are found on the gums, which were formerly called sores by doctors.
Then apply to the cavity a styptic and another cauterizing powder.
Then cauterize the flesh, for if it's necessary to make marks on the skin, use a hot iron to burn them.
In the 29th chapter...
Then apply a cushion on their teeth.
When you are dealing with sharp pain in the feet, it is important to remember that what is known as a "toothache" can also be caused by a different condition called "coys".
And so put your hand on the patient's legs and feet to prevent them from being affected by bad humors.
If you are to be a physician, apply the following translations on their initial application, and the other one's for the other two
And you know that the patient's teeth are what need to be treated. E per cushion the intestine so that it does not harm the patient.
Capitol .xxx. translated to English is Chapter 30.
On the eradication of teeth.
The substance within the leg may cause pain when the tooth is removed.
When a tooth is extracted from a patient who has pain in their teeth, which we must treat quickly to prevent further problems.
And if you have to pull a tooth on the patient's legs and feet, use cushions to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
And if it's necessary to make points on the patient's legs or arms, you should do so gently.
And so if you don’t want to burn yourself, use a pointed instrument for that.
If pain occurs in the foot, apply a cushion to prevent it from being exposed.
The patient's mouth should be opened carefully so that the gums do not bleed.
And if you are a barber who makes incisions in the body, be careful when applying cauterization to the foot, for that is where some parts are treated.
And if it is necessary to make points on the legs or feet, then they should be burned.
When the blood flows freely through the legs, it is called a plague.
The shape of the child's body may be in danger of being damaged by the use of forceps.
And if you need to make marks on the body using the hot iron, do so.
And if it is necessary to apply a hot iron to the affected area to treat it, then do so on their legs for the same reason.
This could be interpreted as a heading or chapter title indicating the start of a new section on treating gout in the body's extremities.
And if you are performing an operation on the legs or feet, it is customary to call it a cauterization.
Then carefully cauterize the leg or legs.
The pain of their condition will be felt in their legs.
And if you do not use the forceps correctly, it is likely to cause pain in the patient's body, which is why they are called gout.
And if your small intestine has been opened, a cushion should be used.
This is the way to treat those who have a triangular shape and are suffering from pain caused by humors which is called gout.
Then describe its shape, the second instrument should be subtle and thin.
And thus you help them with their cushions. And if the patient needs other treatment for a problem in their legs, they need to be treated accordingly.
And if you have a medical text in a language that is not Latin, Italian, French, or Spanish, please provide it.
And then you cauterize the teeth and gums, if necessary.
Many remedies are harmful to those who use them, but they were the ones who were known for their healing properties.
Then when a tooth has been pierced or other bones in the mouth are being set.
And if there is an inflammation in the intestine, it should be treated by placing a bandage over it.
And if there is little pain in the bones, but a great deal of pain elsewhere, that is where they should be treated.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body that cause discomfort in the feet.
And from the treatment of the teeth, they are distinguished by being treated differently.
Then use a poultice on the affected area to draw out the inflammation.
E' il tuo pain if you are applying your hand to the area above the patient's hands, which would be considered two days as a cushion for an injury?
Translation 4:  And so you apply a cupping glass to the patient's thigh, but place your hand on the other areas.
Then place a hot iron on the affected area to cauterize the pain, and avoid using a cushion there. And then put your hand on the patient's leg and cleanse the area where you will perform the procedure.
And if you must apply a cautery to the foot, use a heated instrument.
And if it is necessary to treat the illness with a hot cautery.
Then apply gold or silver to the teeth.
And if you want to make the pain in the legs subside, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you are applying cautery to the patient's legs, then ensure that the pointed instrument is placed on the healthy part of the body. Apply leeches to their legs and use a hot poultice on the other parts.
When your body suffers from such an ailment, it is customary to apply cauterization to the teeth.
The patient's body was then covered with a cushion to protect it from harm. And place your hand on the leg of the patient and apply the same treatment to the intestine and apply another cushion to the foot.
And then place your hand on their legs so that the disease doesn't return.
And if you have a problem in your legs, place your hand over them, as follows:
When blood has been drawn from the metges to make room for the cushion under their limbs and the one on their feet.
And so it should be done by an artisan and wise man.
Then some apply leeches to draw out blood from the affected area, as they are often used for other purposes.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
And from the ligament which is being affected by the pain, apply cautery to the area.
This sentence could be translated as: This ligament is either naturally present or acquired by chance.
Then perform surgery on the patient's legs and do the same to the others, and make sure the patient's tongue does not protrude out during the operation.
If a person experiences pain in the joints, especially in the feet, it is called gout.
If the pain spreads to the legs, it's likely caused by humors, but be careful there are no ruptures in the body.
...the patient's pain is relieved by placing your hand on their body and applying heat to the affected area.
This passage describes how to apply medical treatment for gout. And place your hand on that area to prevent the patient from getting sick.
This text likely refers to the treatment of gout, a condition caused by excess uric acid in the body.
Then apply the same method as for the intestine.
And if it is necessary to open the patient's body for treatment, put a cushion under their tongue.
And if the pain is from the humors in the foot, it is necessary to apply a cautery to it directly.
And if you find swelling in the foot, avoid applying cautery as it would be ineffective.
And when you are treating an ailment, use your hands to apply a hot iron to the affected area, so as to prevent the blood from being too thin.
Then apply the proper remedies to the patient's legs.
The text implies that this section will describe how to treat a particular ailment, presumably related to using a tool or technique for treating someone who has had a specific medical procedure performed on them.
This text describes treating some kind of swelling in the throat area.
When the patient has a fever, apply cold compresses to the area around their throat.
And if the pain is severe, apply a poultice to draw out the gross humors.
When it is necessary to cauterize the body, make the incision on the foot.
E has ses instruments to apply a treatment for gout.
And if it is made of silver or with a tool, I need to be more precise.
Therefore, apply heat to the area of the foot until the pain subsides. And if you are experiencing pain from the ankles upward, use this method to treat the ailment.
And if you are experiencing pain from the ankles upward, use this method to treat the ailment. And if a person's body is affected by the cold humors, they are ill with a disease that causes them to be crooked.
And if a tool is needed for one who has been injured in one leg, then you should cauterize the affected limb, and place the other under the other leg so that it doesn't fall out.
And if the pain is in the foot, apply cauterization to the patient's leg.
Mils e'l dolor de la causa that are treated with thyme and myrtle.
Then put other cushions on their legs, and apply them to the intestine if the illness is in the legs, or on the feet.
And so the woman was treated with a poultice for her blackness, which she had already been suffering from for a day or two, and she was treated by the doctors to have a poultice applied to her throat.
And if a cushion needs to be placed on their legs, it's important to use two other cushions for support.
And if there is no cushion in their mouth, then put it on their legs, so that their body may be heated by it, and place your hand over their feet to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And then apply heat to the legs, and place a cushion on the feet. And then the wound will be treated with a hot iron to cauterize the legs.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's body; one applies cautery with caution, as it is necessary to cauterize.
This refers to applying heat to treat gout in the joints.
From incision in the legs when it is caused by a wound
And if the humors are causing illness to the bowels or legs, it is called humoral sickness.
Then if you are treating a case of inflammation in the leg, know that those who have a good understanding of their treatment should be aware of the color of the bloodletting.
When treating a patient's tongue, treat them in accordance with the method I have described for treating one who has been affected by cold humors, apply it to the area with the same methods used to treat the joints.
And if the patient has a natural opening which is also known as a poultice, you can apply a cushion over their legs, or apply another to the place where the pain is.
And then, make an incision using a tool called aquo (a type of knife) to treat it.
"And then place a cushion under them, and you must apply your hand to the area when using a cautery."
When a doctor cauterizes a wound on someone's leg, or if a bandage is needed for a wound, apply it to the leg with the appropriate caution.
Then apply the heat of a cautery to the area, already cushioned by a cushion, for one hour, as needed.
And if you wish, place the patient's foot under a cushion.
And if you were to apply to the patient's legs or feet a cushion, they would be healed by that cauterization method, but it is important to note that other methods are also used for relief.
And so this type of treatment is more beneficial than cauterization and requires less fear from the patient.
And if a cushion is needed for their cavity, you must place it on the legs or chest, according to the patient's condition.
And if the pain affects the throat, we call it a cough.
Do the same to their legs as you do to the other parts of the body, that is, apply the treatment to those areas from which the ailment originates.
This passage describes using a cautery to treat gout in a patient's foot.
And this treatment will bring about good health.
Capitol 38.  (This assumes "et" means "and", which seems to be the case based on the pattern in the provided examples.)
And if the pain is caused by a sharp object in the throat, it should be treated as such.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot or anywhere else on the body of the patient, due to the cause of the pain.
And if you want to burn away the evil humors from the body, use a hot cautery on their tongue, e.g., by applying a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
When the patient has a sore throat or a cough, they are said to be suffering from a disease similar to a gout attack caused by swallowing a pessa (piece) of food. If a patient has an abscess or boil, they are to be treated with a poultice.
This sentence translates to:
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, then use a hot cautery tool.
Then place a cloth on their bones so that they are protected from the cold during the treatment, for the physician must be careful to protect the bone and avoid complications arising from the use of a cautery on their chest.
Then a cushion was placed on the legs of the patient to prevent them from being further harmed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Then place a cushion on the neck, to prevent them from being cut off by the other.
When your body is ailing, consider using medicine for healing, and not applying hot irons.
Therefore, if you are going to cauterize the legs, place the cushion on them.
And if it is not possible to extract the stone from that person's body, you will apply your hand on their thigh to stop the pain of gout.
Apointedly to the foot, apply a burning to their legs.
The pain in the foot is treated by doctors, who are called physicians.
And then apply cautery.
And if the pain is in the intestine’s surface, then cauterize it; if it is in the feet, apply the appropriate treatment.
And if you don't drink water, your body may become affected by cold humors, but avoid watercress, which is harmful to the body.
This passage describes applying a cautery (a tool used for burning) to treat a patient with a condition that causes pain in their feet, suggesting a connection between the provided passages and the practice of using leeches to draw blood from the affected area. Then if your doctor has said you have already been given the cure for the ailment by the use of lime, he will apply his hand to the affected area, which will prevent them from going out.
The cushion should be placed under the feet, not on the legs or anywhere else.
When phlegm arises in their legs, they are said to have gout.
And if these are boils, they will know what to do.
And then there are various ways to treat a wound with an incision.
Then place another cushion on their legs, so that they are supported by cushions both above and below.
May the doctors hold their hands on the patient's legs so that the intestine doesn't leave its place.
Then place a cushion on the patient’s thigh, if they are in pain, and apply a cold-air treatment to their legs. When a boil has matured, you can lance it.
Then apply another hand to their legs and another one to their foot so that the patient doesn't move it and cause further pain.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's boil or other inflammation, apply a cushion under the area you are treating and place that on their thighs.
And if a wound is made on the body, it is treated by placing a cushion on the leg.
Mays your gut be inflamed or irritated, use honey on their feet, and continue to apply it as we have said for the treatment.
Sometimes doctors mistakenly call gout other ailments.
And if they need to be treated, make small incisions for the purpose of cauterizing the boils.
And if there are other sores, you must treat them as such, and place a cushion on their legs, and put the patient's hands in them.
And the patient's foot has already been treated for a cushion.
And so you should make a cushion for the pain of the feet.
When the patient's leg is affected by those ailments, apply a hot poultice to the area.
The text describes using a cauterized tool to treat a patient's pain in the feet.
You have already opened the opening to the patient's vein, for a bloodletting.
This chapter warns that using too much force in surgical procedures can lead to complications, such as the need for further treatment by other means, if the initial cauterization was unsuccessful.
And if the pain persists, you should apply a cloth to the affected area or use another method of treatment; but do not let the abscess become infected.
And if blood flows out during the operation, you should administer water to it to stop the bleeding.
And if you don't apply treatment, the blood will clot in other parts of the body.
If it is necessary to use a cautery in winter or for other cushion-related reasons, one should know that it is a method to treat pain.
And if in summer, the patient suffers from heat, then apply the poultice to their chest and legs.
Then we need to know the way to treat each individual case.
Chapter xli.
This refers to treating someone with an abscess in the head or neck.
And if they are a little swollen, and then place a cushion on their feet.
And of their nature, they are cold and damp. And if they are in need of a reduction of their body's fluids, it is customary to apply other treatments for that.
And in the removal of them, there is no fear, for it does not cause pain to the patient's legs or feet.
And so the doctor holds their hands while performing the operation.
This is a very literal translation.
And thus the patient's body will be treated if they have an excess of humors in their legs, or if they don't, then the leg will be treated as it were for a wound, and the intestines are not inflamed.
Then apply a cushion to your legs; if it is present, use a different treatment for the pain in the feet.
Then cure the affected area with Egyptian ointment.
And here is how to treat it when your body's humors are out of balance: When a pain arises in the area between the thighs, it is necessary to use cushions for the joints.
And if you have a bow, it is said that a skilled archer should always be careful to maintain proper form.
Here is a possible translation:
Gout is caused by a buildup of certain fluids in the body that are called humors; when these fluids become imbalanced in the body of a woman, it causes pain for them.
When there are other injuries to the leg, you should know that the other injuries are different from each other.
You already have a physician's hand on the patient's legs.
Then apply a poultice that suits the situation to the wound on the patient's foot.
This refers to the use of a cautery tool, which was used in various ways in medicine, but without more context, it's impossible to know what specific condition it's being applied to.
And if you cut into the neck, apply the cautery to the affected area.
And some people say that if you put cushions on their legs and arms, it will relieve them from the pain in those parts.
The last statement refers to the patient having pain in their feet, which is not typical for gout.  Dignus also means worthy or deserving.
And so are these swellings caused by an imbalance of humors treated by the physician.
And use a tool to hold open the skin at the site of the wound for a more superficial treatment.
And more caution is needed, lest it be their knees, and another place in the body where the vein or nerves are located.
This pain in the legs or around an injury is treated by applying cauterization to stop the flow of blood from the wounds. When the blood is drawn out.
This translates to "And if it is necessary to prevent the intestine from being infiltrated by the humors, then return."
Then apply the poultice to their legs and apply heat to the area where they are already making those small incisions.
And if you have a sore throat, your hands are already in the same place as the cushion. When joint pain occurs because of a blockage of fluids in the foot, the patient should be treated by a doctor.
Then apply the Egyptian treatment to the patient's legs, which are already covered with bandages.
And if you treat the disease in the legs, you will soon find relief from the inflammation.
Mays that be the reason for the patient's pain, the cushion should be removed and replaced with a bandage or something similar.
When the foot has pain due to imbalances in the body's humors, it is called a symptom of the disease "scrophulas", which is caused by an excess of dampness in the system, as we have said.
And your hand on their body, or cushion in case of a more severe ailment. And if the infection has been healed or cured, place a cushion under their knee for support.
Another person's foot is treated as if by a burning pain, the other as gout.
When you cut into the patient's legs, use the cushion on the area to be operated on.
The ancients used to call this type of pain "gout" when it occurred in the legs.
And this is the description of the disease.
Then apply cushions on their legs, as those are needed to keep them from suffering pain in the ankles, and another cushion should be placed on the patient's feet to avoid them from being too hot.
When someone has a sore throat or ulcers in their legs, use cushions to protect them.
And if you want to do it, place four cushions on the legs.
And if a doctor is unable to get rid of the swelling in the throat, avoid the pain of the cushion being placed under the neck, but also on the limbs, he puts his hand on their chest.
Then return to the patient's hands for cautery already in use, but if necessary, open the intestine.
And the patient's body will be left open for some time.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on their body, do so carefully.
And let another apply medicine to their legs, and yet another to their feet.
And if the patient has died, the legs should be used as a cushion for the rest of the body.
And if the disease persists for three days, the humors have become too strong; therefore the doctors should treat it with a cautery.
And I, as a physician, have seen that it is a custom to use a cautery for ailments, and I can cure those ailments with a remedy.
Therefore, we have to admit that the doctors were right about the patient's illness.
And if you have a pain in the intestine, do not worry, as long as the cushion is placed under their thighs.
And now I say that there is no fear in the surgeon's hands.
Chapter xliv.
A hernia on the legs is also called an inguinal hernia.
And this one is called a boil or bubo by other doctors.
The cause of the pain is in their legs due to an imbalance in the humors.
In the common ailment, known as the gout, it is customary to apply remedies to the affected joints in the toes and feet.
Then the doctor uses two methods to treat them. Then one should not accuse someone of being proud if their body is small. And if you have already opened the patient's body for them, and find that there are nodi, then place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestine from being affected by the pain.
This is Latin for "Chapter 45."
On the treatment of the disease called gout.
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already discussed them.
I have no idea what an "exitura" is, but I guess the doctors are trying to treat pain in the legs or feet.
Therefore, it is necessary to apply heat to their legs.
A hot, sharp pain in the toe, which is what I'm guessing is what the doctor is usually treating when they say "gout."
And if it is a great pain, you should apply a cushion to the affected area, and another to the other foot, depending on the location of the pain.
And if you are a doctor who wants to treat inflammation, use cushions as needed on the patient's body parts.
This means that you should apply the cushion to the patient's body gently and slowly so as not to cause further pain.
And apply cautery to the affected area according to the severity of the inflammation.
And if it is necessary to use a cauterizer on the patient, you should do so superficially.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area again.
This is a tricky one! I need more context to understand the exact meaning of "e coys" and "autre" in this passage. And so if you are skilled in medicine, you may already have placed your hand on their leg, but for those who suffer from gout, it is said that they should be treated with leeches.
And if it breaks open during treatment, you will apply cauterization to their legs and call for the surgeon.
If the pain in the body is caused by an imbalance of humors, apply a cushion to their legs, and if they are being cauterized, then apply the hot iron to the area where the pain is felt.
And if some part of the body needs to be cauterized, it should be done with an acute cautery.
When there's a large amount of swelling, you should apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if it is a pain caused by a blockage in the blood, the physician will say that the patient needs to have their veins removed from the blockage.
This sounds like it could be a title or heading in an old text, likely indicating Chapter 46.
From the tools needed for surgery and that which is necessary for perforation.
The pain affects the feet.
Then, then, you will find the translation below, but I'll translate that other line for you as well because it seems like a fun exercise!
Here comes the translation:
Let the patient's legs be cauterized and the body be healed by the use of fire.
This is a medical text about treating ailments using cauterization.
And if it is a foot, the body is of three types: those who are sick from the head down to the feet; those who are sick in the legs and feet; and those who are well, which is a sign of good health.
If it is necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done on the affected legs, and another procedure should be performed if needed.
La forma de experient should be translated as "the form of" or "the way to treat", depending on context.
"And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it is applied to their thighs."
The patient's leg must be treated for all the other ailments that may come from the pain.
And then, the patient's bowels are to be kept in balance, so that they may not be troubled by the gout.
And if they are black and painful, those are the symptoms of a disease called gangrene.
Gaiters are used to treat diseases in the legs and feet.
Shape of the lead form.
And if it is necessary to treat the body for illness, the type of treatment that would be used depends on the location of the ailment.
Gout is caused by a build-up of humors in the body.
The other side of the body is a cushion for the patient's legs.
And from their bodies, you know them by three signs.
And those are the two curves of the body, which is made up of three things.
E si se vos desidera, la dolor es que vos causa las tres curvaturas en el cuerpo, e si non, e si si, in the case that the pain is due to one of the three types of humors, not the other.
Then all these things are necessary for their proper place.
When translated literally, the phrase "of a few" would refer to a small number.
Autre le nom for the cushion in their hand. A burning pain in the legs. And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's legs, they must be held straight.
And so the patient should have three curves.
The form of a physician has three curves.
These are the methods for treating swellings in the body: those that are treated surgically, with medicine, or with a combination of both.
The form of the body or a part of it that is used for surgery.
The shape of the affected area:
The shape of the knife is designed for the type of pain the patient has.
For a condition like a cold humors one in the joints it is customary to apply a cushion for the affected areas and to treat others by cauterizing them.
And these are the ways to treat the three forms of the ailment: acute, chronic, and intermittent.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, and another to their arms, using a cushion for support.
And if you want to apply cautery, do so as much on the hidden parts as on the surface.
The cushion must be placed on the legs to prevent them from being pierced by the other tools. And then place your hand on the patient's chest, and another on their feet.
And there are three types of forms for cupping therapy, which were used to treat leucorrhea and other ailments by applying cups to the body and using them on their thighs to apply the treatment to the legs.
And if it is customary to call them by a specific name, they should be called that.
These are types of cupping treatments, but these are not medicines.
But if they are not in their proper place in the body, they will be treated by physicians.
And if you are translating this sentence correctly, it's describing how gout was named in the past.
"And in this manner, they are used to by doctors, those who treat gout."
The text appears to be about **treating gout with fire** in a way that resembles medieval medical practices.
And the treatment of their breasts or legs is called "mamillae" by doctors.
Some people say that some homes are already swollen with inflammation, while others have cushions for leeches.
.B. the patient's legs and another cushion placed on their chest.
And if there are many things to be done, you should do these things as needed to cure the ailment.
E so the patient’s health be troubled by the humors, which are already present in the body, you should apply a poultice to draw them out, and then use another cushion on their legs and knees.
Chapter XLVIII.
A surgeon should apply heat to the area of the boil.
And if a pus-filled boil has formed in their legs, then apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
And if you are going to treat someone's foot, then do so with the help of the moon.
And to whatever extent they are affected by the burn, the remedy will be applied to the affected area.
When there's pain from the humors in a patient's legs or feet, you might treat it with a cautery.
And if the plague is spreading widely, use a cauterizer to treat it, just as was previously described.
Another version of the text could be translated as: "And if it is necessary to make points on the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
This refers to applying a cautery to the affected area, likely the foot, in order to treat a disease caused by the imbalance of humors.
And if you see that the bowstring has been broken open, it is known by these signs that it is inflammation and if it's a purulent one, it’s called gout: hence the name.
When by humors it is necessary for the veins to be opened, it is revealed through the body.
And if it is necessary to treat an apostema, avoid using a cushion to cauterize it, but rather use other methods on the legs or thighs.
Then apply an incision to the affected area and make a note of its location, so as to ensure that the patient's body is not opened further.
The other way to put the patient's body in the right position for the physician is by using a special tool called an "instrument" or "tool," which is used to burn the skin.
When the patient is in pain, place a cushion on their legs.
And if you apply a poultice to the affected area, then you are treating the patient in the proper way.
E if the patient's vein has to be opened, it is necessary that the boil be lanced.
And if you are treating an abscess, draw a poultice from the legs to where the pain is felt.
And so you should make an incision to drain the pus from the body.
Then place the cushion on their legs and feet.
This chapter deals with the burning of the affected area by a heated cautery.
And if it happens that the intestine or the feet are affected by a painful condition, place a cushion to protect them.
And if it is caused by other agents, it is called pain in the legs or feet, depending on where the pain is felt.
And apply heat to the affected area, as is often done for other ailments, but in this case, the pain is caused by the inflammation that affects the body.
When it is not an abscess, it is a boil on their body, and the patient has to be treated with a hot iron to burn out the boil, and the heat goes to the area of the boil, but it doesn't work.
Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the affected area for those suffering from gout on the legs.
Just as if it were a pain in the head or the forehead, the other servant will help you with a burning glass. Mays is an ailment that affects the body's humors, causing pain in the feet, which is what doctors call gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, use the cushion method for the larger ones, but the cushion method for the smaller ones.
The chapter title suggests the beginning of a numbered section, likely in an Italian medical treatise.
And then apply a cushion to their legs.
Then the doctors apply their knowledge to the patient's feet and other body parts, using a cautery for burns in case they need to cauterize the affected area.
And he had seen one, and in the patient's stomach there were two parts, and his/her intestine was inflamed, so they were put on the ground, and the other part of the body was placed on their chest.
And if their mouth was split, they would have been called gouty lips.
And if you have an incision or wound there, it should be treated carefully.
And if the operation in the case of an illness caused by humor; then treat it with a pointed cautery.
And if the patient has suffered an injury, place a cushion under them.
E therefore adjust the lead weights to the body, and let them be applied with the utmost effort.
Mays if there be a pain in the legs, it is better to place a cushion under them.
Mays possibla is the patient's body, it is possible they have a condition that doctors call a "maytat".
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, that's what should be done.
And keep your hands from the patient when you apply heat to their feet.
And you have already opened the space on their legs, and another cushion will be placed under them.
This looks like a corrupted or archaic text!
On treatment for a condition of swelling in the area around the navel.
The first cause of the condition is when the humors are concentrated in the body, leading to pain in the feet, which is why it is called "the gout."
May it be known that if a man's body is troubled by a fever. And if the humor is removed from their legs and feet, then the patient will be free from the pain.
But if one were to treat the feet with a cushion, they would be healed by the cushion, not the disease.
And you have already applied cautery to the affected area.
When there are no signs of inflammation in the body, the patient will have less pain.
And if it is caused by wind, it will be treated as a lion.
This refers to the treatment of a condition (likely gout) by doctors.
And if it is a pain in the foot, then you have to use the proper method for treating it, which is with a hot cautery.
And place your hand on their legs
You have found a bump on the leg;
Mays if you have an arrow in your hand, that is contrary to your usual practice.
And if you wish to perform acupuncture on the patient, it is customary to use needles.
This translates to: And if the omentum is swollen due to inflammation, then apply your hand to the area where the cushion should be.
The title of the text suggests a chapter from a medical treatise.
Translation: Another treatment for the body.
And I have said that there are three types of gout: acute, chronic, and traumatic; and that there is no pain in the first type, but the other two are used for treatment.
E dia that some of the ancients translated the text to say: When the pain of ancient diseases arises in a limb, they are called that which is in their body, by the name of those who have been afflicted with such.
When cold and hot it is not gout that you will be cured of: It is by applying the hot cautery.
This refers to the process of treating the bubonic plague, which involved draining the buboes, or swollen lymph nodes, that were characteristic of the disease.
Then, place your hand on the area where they are applying the cushion to prevent the intestine from protruding too much; if the patient’s suffering from a pain in the joints, it is a proper treatment. And then the blood runs freely, and the rest of their body is also relieved of pain.
If a patient has an illness that causes pain in the body, particularly in the joints, then they have a painful condition in the legs, and another will be placed on their arm to avoid the opening of the vein or veins.
The first chapter of a medical treatise about the treatment of gout.
On the treatment of gout.
The cure for gout is discussed, including the use of medicines.
When a person has been cured by a burning sensation, they are no longer considered a patient needing cautery.
The first line translates to: And if you apply a hot cautery to this type of illness, it should be applied with caution.
When the patient has an ailment, the way to treat it is by having a cushion placed under their body, and another on their chest, so you must be careful that the hernias are not caused by a similar condition.
"It is said that the patient has a cushion on their thighs; if they have another pain in their legs, which can be quite sharp, then treat them with caution when treating the area near the knee."
And so the patient's condition will be called "dropsy" if it is caused by fluid buildup in the chest.
And if the patient's illness is caused by a bad liver, make a cut in the area, which will be three fingers wide.
E si the leg pain is caused by cold humors, you should apply a hot poultice to their thighs and another to the patient's legs, making sure to avoid cauterizing the knee.
Put a cushion under their feet to prevent gout from occurring there.
And apply the instrument to the entire thigh, scraping away at the skin.
And then place the cushion under their feet. Already place your hand on the patient's leg to extract the form. This passage is describing a description of gout in the original Latin text.
And if it is necessary to use an instrument on the legs, the other two sources are used for the thighs and the lower leg.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on the intestine or a cushion placed upon the legs, and for the patient to be taken care of by a physician, the whole body should be treated gently, but if the pain is in the feet, it is customary to treat them with the utmost care.
And apply the instrument to their bowels, which are in pain due to that method.
And you leave the instrument in place for a few days to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the affected area, it should be done for a long time with hot medicines.
and if you cauterize it, apply heat to the area and place a cushion on the stomach,  et cetera.
Capitol 51.
And thus you have treated those children who have gout.
Then some things are done to prevent a cushion from being needed by the patient's body.
And thus, the patient is subject to a subtle burning sensation.
And apply a poultice of a soft leaden substance to that part of the body, to be sure.
And when the bladder needs to be opened, apply it.
Then you may have to use other methods, because the patient's intestines are swollen.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es que le dolor es de la altre costat.
This ma can cause the legs to swell.
The translation is a bit off, but I believe the text describes the process of treating a patient suffering from a condition that causes pain in the foot.
And if you have a wound in your legs, apply a cautery to stop the bleeding.
**Capitol .lvi.**
The foreskin should be treated for inflammation and infection.
This sentence refers to a condition where there are painful lumps in the body caused by an imbalance of humors.
And one of these humors is bad and another is good, but which is which?
For you have not yet seen the patient's disease, but if there is another case, treat it as you would normally treat such ailments.
And if the humors are malignant, they should be treated by a physician by applying a treatment to them.
And if the condition is present outside the body, it is called a foreign injury to the foreskin.
Then you have to apply a poultice on their legs to soothe them.
And if you wish to cure them, prepare for it carefully.
And if blood flow to the leg is disrupted, it is through the use of moon-shaped cauterization that it is treated.
When the body's blood is cold, it causes the veins to be blocked.
And if you place a cushion under their legs, you must place another on the penis, so that he doesn't urinate out of it.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; and apply another cushion on their feet.
Then return the patient's legs and place a cushion on their thighs to protect them from the heat of the cautery.
Then one should separate the foreskin from the head of the penis, so that the water does not make it stick out.
And here you treat the patient's legs with wine that will consolidate the healing process.
Another treat them with a hot cautery on the legs.
And it is said that the cause of pain in the legs is due to something else.
When a doctor wants to remove something from the patient's body, they will use a cautery, but if they want to continue to treat them, they should use their hands.
And if it is necessary to make an incision, you should use a heated cautery tool.
This is a guess: "And if the patient's legs are to be treated" Cease to be so if you wish for it to remain hidden.
Another person will apply the bandage to the affected leg or foot. The child's body must be treated by a doctor.
And if the patient has humors from the foot, which are to be cauterized by a physician, he will feel pain, but it is said that the pain in the legs is caused by the same way as the one in the feet.
This is the way to treat a child suffering from a disease by using a cautery on their legs.
And if it is necessary to treat the ailment with a cushion, etc., then rejoice because you can now do so effectively. And he kept his hand on the bandage to keep the wound from being infiltrated by the cold humors that are in your gut, and no one could touch it with a cautery because...
And then place your hand on their intestine, to prevent the infection from spreading further.
This is a description of how to use forceps during childbirth, but it's unclear if it refers to a specific type of modification or technique.
The intestines are swollen or painful, then you need to use a hot cautery on the affected area.
And if there are errors in the body's cleansing, it is said to be the case of the entire intestine or the foot being affected.
Then you must use your hand to stop the pain from spreading further in the body than the foot, which is where it belongs.
And if you can't get them to hold still.
After three days have passed, if the pain persists, the patient should be treated with a poultice and a cautery applied to the affected area.
And so if you have to apply a cautery, be careful that it does not burn the flesh.
And therefore, treat that limb carefully, as the other parts of the body are treated in this manner.
and if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, apply the cautery on the other side.
And if there's anything I can do to help, I will try to translate it accurately.
Translation: Another servant will be on their knees, holding their legs.
And so the treatment for the retention of urine in the bladder is called.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs so that they are covered.
And if the cause of the ailment be not removed by means of a lancet, then apply a burn to the patient's legs.
And if you wish to know what the cause of his urine might be, hold your hand over the wound on his leg, which is where the doctors would have a cushion put.
And make sure there's a cushion under them: one for the legs, and another for the feet.
Then place a cushion on the patient's body so that they will be able to apply it to their own belly and another one already in place.
And if it is necessary to let the patient's urine drain, they should use a catheter.
Then apply the other cauteries as needed to restore balance to the patient's humors.
Chapter 59
Let the bladder be cleansed by a similar method used for the foot.
And thus you make an incision to release the pressure from the veins of the body.
But if the first member is closed off, it should be opened up again. And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs of the one who has been affected by the injury, and one on their hands.
At the beginning, place a cushion under their legs.
When it becomes necessary to stop the flow of urine or the humors in the body of a patient.
Then apply the cauteri to the patient's legs; otherwise, the patient's bladder will be affected.
This is a text written in a language similar to Latin and French that describes how doctors treat gout.
And if you make a piece of silver or other metal, it's said to be made of thin sheets.
Then place a cushion under their legs.
And then apply it to the patient’s legs.
And then apply a hot poultice to the bladder.
And if you want to treat pain in the joints, place your hand on the area of the body where the patient has pain and apply the cushion to the area around their feet.
Then place a cushion over their legs to prevent the swelling from spreading.
Capitol .lx.
From the text, I think this means:
Nos already have explained the difference between stone in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, and the signs of one or the other.
And if they are suffering from pain in their legs, it is important to take note of the location of the pain and any other ailments the patient has.
And if a stone forms in the bladder, it is called a stone.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient, that is what they are for.
The text describes an individual experiencing gout in their feet.
And then you should apply your hand to the affected area of the body. May it be called gout if in young people, and then apply hot water to the affected area.
And if there is no pain in the legs, it’s considered a milder ailment.
Gout is sometimes called a disease of the humors that affects the joint pain.
And then place your hand on the affected area to treat it.
And if you wish to stop the disease spreading from the legs to the rest of the body.
And so you will cauterize that area and leave the burn open to heal properly.
Therefore if you feel the pain in the legs, cauterize the area immediately to prevent it from spreading.
If you do not properly apply cushions to the knee, then it is young, it will be painful for them. And if you do that, the patient will be able to stand up again. And you should carefully apply heat to the area of the body where it hurts.
Then place your hand upon them to prevent the pain from spreading.
And have the minister apply pressure with their hands to the affected area, while another part of the body is placed under a cushion for comfort.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the legs or thighs, treat them first with a hot cautery. And if it is necessary to treat a person's humors, use a cushion to elevate the body part affected by gout.
Then you must know that the human body is already familiar with the pain from the burn.
And from their legs and feet, which are now exposed to the elements, they will be afflicted by gout, a pain in the bones.
Then you have to make sure that the affected part is properly cauterized.
When you place a tool on the body, it should be placed in a way that does not cause harm to the bones or muscles.
If you cannot remove the pain by other means, then cauterize it with fire and vitriol.
This is a description of how to treat a patient with pain in their bowels and feet.
"And if there is a large swelling in the legs, put a cushion under them, for when one has a large swelling, there are two possible causes."
And treat them with cushions to hold whatever is swollen or inflamed in the joints so that they don't protrude further.
So apply a hot cautery to the cavity after you have opened it. And apply a cloth to their skin, for if they are affected by an ailment caused by them, it is customary to use a poultice.
Then you should place your hand on the patient's legs, keeping them elevated.
And when the patient has been given a potion to relieve the pain, apply the dia-balm to their body.
And when there is an inflammation of the joints in the body, it is known as gout.
And apply heat to the patient's feet as needed for the treatment.
You have already been treated by the physicians for the ailment.
And if there are small stones, you should use a hot iron to cauterize the area where the injury is located.
From the first sentence it appears that "de" means "of",  "fust" means "body", and "extramitat" likely refers to a part of the body, perhaps the leg?
Then place a cushion under them, and on their legs.
...and placed a cushion on their legs, to prevent them from procreating ... And then apply the cautery to the point of pain on the legs, so that it is easier for you to close it back up again.
When your hands are used to hold and press on the stone, another cushion will be placed on the feet.
And so you should cauterize the patient's body above the knee, and apply pressure. And there place upon the foot a cushion, and the other one on the thigh, which will help control the pain in their legs. And then place a cushion on their legs. Then apply the cauteries to the affected areas, and carefully treat them with the appropriate methods.
And when the bowel has been opened, it is customary to apply a cautery on the intestine to prevent the infection from spreading to other parts of the body, but the pain remains in the legs and feet.
And if the patient's legs are blistered, you should apply a cushion to their legs, and collect the pus as we previously mentioned.
And then apply cauterization to their joints.
Another common practice used by doctors is to apply a cauterizing agent to help reduce swelling and inflammation.
It is said that it is rare for stones to be engendered in women.
It is difficult to treat these ailments, and they are often associated with pain in the joints, but if you must make them, then it's best to do so carefully, avoiding infection of the body by the blood.
The woman's illness is caused by an imbalance of humors in her body.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or abdomen, then use this method for women and men.
This sentence suggests the speaker is instructing someone on how to treat gout using an "art" that involves cauterization.
And the fourth condition is that if there is a need to cauterize the body, they should be placed on their legs, as you put the cushion under them, for the rest of the day.
It is likely that you need a cushion to support your legs.
When there are many women who have been placed in a state of illness, they need to be treated by someone skilled in the art of medicine.
Then apply a burning cautery to the woman's foot if she has a pain there, and put a cushion under her feet, then she will be able to see what is going on in the world.
Therefore, if you have pain in the legs, do the same thing as you did to the intestine (of the intestine).
If they are not a virgin, then I must be careful to keep my hands in a place where they cannot catch the disease.
Then place a cushion on the bladder to keep it from being painful.
Then you will apply the cautery to their legs.
And if it is necessary to apply a hot compress to the patient's legs, let them be applied; the pain will be treated by another method.
And so forth, for the most part, are the spices of the stone, sharp and strong.
And if you know that there are how many species of the other, you will mark them as such.
And if blood flows freely, then apply heat to the legs to stop it.
And so the doctor says that he prepares the tools for surgery with which to operate.
And when there is a flow of blood, and you know that the blood flows from the patient, then hold your hand on their [blood] vessel to stop the pain. And it is the patient's own body that heals the plague.
The other uses the term "gout" in a way that is very similar to how you would describe the condition.
A cushion is placed under the affected area.
Then another cushion under their legs.
A hernia occurs when the body's humors are out of balance.
And another name for the pain in the foot is gout.
And put a cushion on their legs so that the doctors may treat them.
And thus the patient's body should be treated with specific attention to their humors.
Then apply a poultice to soothe the inflammation in the foot due to a hernia.
And if the dampness is in their own body, then they say it is due to cold humors.
And if they are suffering from humidity and need to be cauterized, you should place them on their backs with a cushion under their feet, or the patient has a swollen gut, so apply cautery to their legs.
And if you want to know the nature of the inflammation, what is left in the sore will tell you what caused it.
And then, for the treatment of the patient's body, if it is possible to cauterize them, use it.
And then the patient lies on their back, and they are covered with a blanket.
E  la locum teneat un altra verga, and you place a hand on the patient’s legs, to do it in his/her stomach.
And then apply splints to the legs, the patient will be relieved by this.
And make an incision along the line of the sole, which you will have marked with a cautery.
You have already opened a wound that should be carefully examined, as well as the other parts which are open to your treatment.
And you place the cushion on the foot.
E aprop separa la cosa that is, so as to be able to separate them in the same manner. And if it is possible to cauterize the intestine and make it stay put, then do so carefully.
The author of the text considers what to call the condition that causes pain in the joints.
And if you apply a poultice to their legs, another one will be used on them by itself.
When the water is distilled, it is customary to call it gout.
And apply a poultice to the affected area with a cushion to protect the skin from the heat.
Then apply a cushion to the location where the patient has pain, which is how gout is treated by doctors.
The patient's feet are being cauterized. And if it is a small wound, it is treated with a cauterization tool.
When it is necessary to apply cautery on their legs.
When there is swelling in the legs, place the cauterizer on the area to be treated, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if it is better to treat the pain by cauterizing or applying heat, they say that the use of a hot cautery is necessary for gout and should be applied to the legs or feet.
And if it is contrary to the nature of the body, then treat it as you would a wound or cut on the foot.
This translates to: The patient must be treated with cauterization so that the pain in the body part can be alleviated; if there is a doubt about whether the condition is caused by an excess of hot humors.
Therefore, if the surgeon deems it necessary to treat an infected abscess on the foot, he should apply the treatment with a pointed cautery.
And they have called this condition "the wide opening" and the cushion under their knees, the other on their legs.
And if there is a pain in the foot, then treat it as doctors would treat any other ailment by applying heat to the affected area. And if it is necessary, you apply cauterization to heal the plague.
In the hour when the plague is upon you, you'll need to cauterize the affected limb.
If you apply heat to the affected area, it will be treated by cauterization.
Capitol 63.
To cut open the chest and other parts for the treatment of the hernia.
And so that you know, in a hernia the patient's body will be already treated by a doctor.
And thus the operation is remembered by the physician.
Then apply it to the body, and another application for the patient's feet.
And if there are other issues in the body, they will cause intense pain.
E forthe a cushion on their legs, they will be held by them back to the original position.
And sometimes pain in those veins is caused by inflammation of the blood vessels.
When if one has them put a cushion on their legs, they should be careful that their hands are placed correctly.
The first servant is to be used on them if it is determined that the swelling in the legs is due to vein inflammation.
E then it is possible that some pain in the body, which is caused by the feet being affected, can be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
Therefore, if you are a physician, and you have already made an incision on the patient's leg, then you should place a cushion on the wound.
And if there is an adhesion in the intestine, apply another cushion on the patient's legs.
When there is an already existing pain in the body where the skin has been affected by the flesh, the other servant may be placed behind them to hold their legs.
Then because you have opened the space between the patient's legs, apply another cushion to their feet.
Capitol .lxiv.
This refers to the treatment of a type of hernia that affects the legs.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area for a while.
This is for fear that the disease may be severe because it affects the limbs, which are already being treated.
But if a cushion should be placed on their legs, doctors will call them "legs."
And if he/she wants to prevent the intestine from being too exposed, they should place the cushion under them.
Then place a cushion on their legs and cut open the area around the vessels where they are located.
Then the doctor must apply his hand to the affected area.
Translation 2: And if you wish to know where the needle is located on the body, you should ask for it. And then apply those incisions to the legs, which are made in the corrupt humors.
Then treat the disease with a hot iron to cauterize the affected area so that the ailment is contained.
And if it is necessary to make incisions in the testicles, it is customary to place cushions under them.
e aprop a directus the loc per la cura del mal de la planta etis.
Then apply the treatment with a tool for intestinal hernias.
And if you find an opening in the intestines, it is called a hernia.
This pain is caused by several reasons, such as excess cold in the body which affects the feet and causes the intestine to be affected by the condition.
And if the intestine is affected by the cold, it causes a pain in the foot, which is why they are called gouty pains.
And the sign of them is when a sudden pain occurs in the stomach or leg.
And at other times it is called a hernia.
When there is pain in the intestines, it's another cushion for the patient to be placed on their legs, and another cushion if necessary.
Then return the patient's legs to their original state by applying points to the legs.
And if you are to operate on a patient's leg, put a cushion under their feet.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's testicles or scrotum.
E si'l ha por lo manetz: And if there is pain in the foot it is called gout.
Then the patient's testicles are cauterized with a hot tool.
When the testicles are infiltrated by heat from the blood, they can be treated by applying cold to them.
And if you wish to make a diagnosis of what causes the body's humors, one must look at the pain in the legs; for example, the part affected by gout; where the cautery has been used.
E cerqua, am that which is other than the usual causes of gout. If you find that there's a need for it, then treat them to be treated properly.
"Then place the patient's body in a position where it is already as the other cushion touches the body."
And let oil be applied to the legs, if they are affected by a condition, which could be gout, for the sake of their health.
If there is no immediate improvement, apply heat to the affected area.
And it is said that it heals the plague.
And if there's a need for a cautery, it should be applied to the affected leg, and the patient should be held down.
Then describe the pain in the patient's feet.
And then they will see if the patient has a fever or other signs of illness.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area of the body.
And cure the plague according to the way we said, until it be healed.
This sentence is likely from a translated version of a medical text, and the translation you provided seems to be taking some creative liberties.
Another one from the patient's thighs.
When there is a need to cauterize the afflicted, apply the cautery to the affected limb as well as they are called for.
Then apply heat to the affected area, but avoid burning the skin.
When the foot pain is prolonged and the intestine is stiff, apply a poultice directly to the affected area and use cushions to support the patient's body, and place your hand on their stomach, as we have previously said.
This refers to treating the patient with something that burns or cauterizes.
And sometimes it is cured by placing a hot cautery on the affected area, which is why the patient's legs should be warmed up first.
And then apply a cushion to the affected area below their feet.
Translation 4: You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and another cushion on their legs, and another one where the intestines are located.
And adjust the cushion to fit the two limbs well.
And if it is necessary to remove something from the patient's body, and do not injure other organs.
And apply a cautery to the patient's legs, keeping it on the affected area.
And the patient's health is improved by cauterization.
Capitol LXVIII (or 68) - This chapter likely discusses medical treatment for painful conditions.
And concerning the softening of the pain in the testicles.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on their legs, it is good practice to use cushions for support.
When the pain affects the patient's feet, the doctors use heat to treat it.
And apply the bandage in three or four layers, with firm stitching.
And then apply another to his legs to heal them.
Another (possible) name for "gout" could be found in the old medical texts.
Concerning castration.
And if it is necessary to castrate animals by our means;
Therefore, castration can be performed in two ways: by crushing or by incision.
And so the doctors will treat the patient's wounds with hot water compresses. And then put a cushion under their arms and legs to prevent them from opening up further.
When you are performing a castration, then hold the beast's testicles by their side.
And if there is something in the armpits or other joints.
Then cauterize the legs of the patient where you've already placed the cushion on their body, and another servant on their chest, and then apply the other cushions as needed. And do not allow the pain to spread from their feet, by keeping them warm and dry.
And in this way of castration, you should know which is better, for the beast will have no more use for its testicles.
And if you are near the afflicted leg, then cauterize it.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of the ambiguous condition.
The first part of the given text translates to: "Hermaphroditism in men is considered by itself..."
And on the legs or thighs it is customary to put another's name in the cavity.
In women, the conh (concussion) can be caused by injuries to the head, such as a blow to the temple.
There are three types of cures for wounds: those for men, those for women, and those that are general to all. And if there be need to apply cautery to the patient's body, use the cushion to prevent them from feeling pain.
And for men who suffer from a blockage, there are other treatments.
Chapter .xxi.
The pain is from the doctors using a hot cautery to treat it.
And some are affected by bad air in their bodies, and they should be treated for this with caution as to its causes.
And then they should place a cushion under their feet if needed, to prevent them from moving.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, but less so to the feet, as they are more sensitive.
And if you apply it to the area affected by the plague, it may be effective in treating the illness.
And if it is necessary to make an incision into the body, then let it be done with great care.
This appears to be a portion of a medical treatise describing the use of a poultice for treating an ailment.
And for the treatment of pain, use a cauterizing tool.
Then, if a woman's body needs to be treated, use a small cautery. It can be either natural or accidental.
And the body is affected by the illness, and a cushion on the legs, and another in the other place where the illness affects them.
When you have identified the cause of pain in the limbs or joints, then use a method to reduce the swelling of the affected area.
If there are pains in the legs, and they are sharp, apply a leech to their body, and use a poultice on other areas.
If the patient has a fever, they are likely to be affected by the heat of the disease.
And do you place cushions on his legs to support them.
Another cushion should be placed on the woman's womb to ensure she stays comfortable.
And then apply oil to the area where it has been cauterized so that the pain does not become chronic.
And if the cushion is thick and heavy, use a tool to make an incision above the knee.
This means apply the remedy to the affected area as soon as possible.
Then apply a bandage to the leg after cauterizing with a hot iron.
And apply a lead cushion to their legs so as to prevent the plague from spreading within them.
And if they have been suffering from an illness, you should use a cautery on their legs and thighs.
And you should apply another treatment for the treatment of gout?
And if it is necessary to make incisions, it should be done in the leg muscles, using a hot cautery, by applying a poultice to the affected area after the incision has been made. If you are already dealing with the pain from the boils, use cushions to protect the area from further discomfort.
Chapter 73.
Then apply a hot cautery to treat hemorrhoids in women, using a poultice of lint and other materials.
The translation for "Emorroydas so apprecio" should be "And if it is a vein that's inflamed" or "And also the old veins".
The original text must be held in a specific posture to treat the disease.
When gout affects the bowels or legs, it is treated by applying heat.
Those are the ones who have the cure for their ailment.
And if you are in need to apply cautery on the surface of the body, use a cushion with the patient.
And then pulverize the veins on the legs.
Then cauterize the patient's feet for an hour with a hot iron and another cushion.
And if the blood flow is continuous, the other part should be covered by the hand of the physician.
Then apply to the patient's back a poultice of honey and wine.
Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
Then, to heal, apply cilantro and a poultice.
And if it is caused by a fever, it is another disease that is spread throughout the body.
Chapter 74.
The surgeon will make an incision on the patient's leg.
Some swellings appear in the legs and feet due to various causes. And if the patient's sickness is a certain type, place a cushion under them and use other tools for treatment.
And if it is a hot pain in the affected foot, then you can use a cautery to treat it.
When the body's humors cause inflammation, then apply heat to the affected area.
And for the man who has his hands on the woman's body.
In these cases, midwives typically use a tool to open the patient's body, as they traditionally do for childbirth.
Then apply the heated instrument to the body part where it needs to be applied. And then apply cauterization to their legs.
And if you have a pain in the leg that is sharp, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And when you have to make an incision, do so with a tool kept hot and apply pressure to the wound after.
And if it is necessary to place a needle on the legs, it is said that you should put it on the foot's cushion.
When there is pain in the body, apply a cushion to their legs.
Then apply the poultice for two days to heal the affected area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize something, apply the cautery to the legs or the feet, depending on where the inflammation occurs.
And if a cushion is placed on their legs, be careful to note that in the case of sickness, you are prohibited from using it on the patient's body.
Capitol .lxxv. translates to: Chapter 75.
And so we have already discussed the cause of the disease, but if the pain is located in the legs, that is also called a cushion.
The midwife must apply pressure to the baby’s body to help guide the birth canal during labor.
Thus, when these symptoms appear, the body must be covered with a cushion so that no fluid is lost.
And if you want to apply a cautery to the foot or leg, then put your hand on the patient's knee to protect it from going to the head.
If there is a need to apply a hot cauterizing iron, one should be careful not to burn the patient's skin.
And do you see how the patient's leg is? If so, apply cautery to those areas.
When the body is affected by heat, it is cooled with cold water.
And then apply a needle to the second part of their body by making a small incision in the thigh. And if the pain is in the abdomen, apply pressure to hold it in place.
Mays, in case there's a need for it, you have placed a cushion on their legs, and another on the other side.
And if necessary, apply a poultice to the patient's legs for an hour to reduce inflammation.
And if the pain is in the legs due to gout, it is necessary for you to open them up gradually. And if you are too obese, you may be prone to gout.
And if a person experiences joint pain caused by a coldness that has settled in their body, you will need to put your hand on their foot to prevent the humors from escaping.
When the foot is affected, it is necessary to apply a cautery to its small size.
Then you should apply a cautery to the legs, if God wills it.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice or use their hands on the body.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound in the foot, apply a cushion to their legs. Then apply the treatment to the afflicted body part.
E cum vezes that the body's ailments are alleviated by applying heat to the area affected by cold humors. And then apply heat to their legs, and use your hand to hold a hot iron over them.
And if the patient has a pain in their legs, place something under them to support the body. And if you need to reduce the swelling on the patient's foot, place your hand on their thighs and your other on the foot.
Then if one cannot walk because of the pain in their legs, they must be placed on their back, and apply another cushion to the area where the pain is located.
And when the pain comes in the feet, the patient will be given a cushion to place on their feet and they are to put their hands into their pockets so that the cushions do not cause further damage.
The patient's legs are being cauterized. The midwife should keep the patient's legs warm and apply cauterization to the affected area only if necessary.
And when he has been treated for a while, the physician will place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent pain from coming out.
Then command your legs to be treated in such a way that they are carefully cauterized. The failure of the fetus to thrive leads to pain in the legs.
When there is inflammation in the legs, treat them accordingly to the method of cauterization, which you will use on the legs to remove their pain.
And if you have to apply cautery to their feet, use it on the legs, otherwise it will be difficult to perform the operation.
And if one has applied a cushion to the leg, they say that you've done well, but for the foot itself, use a light touch, if God wills.
And then they are cured by many. And you know that the pain of labor pains is known to be caused by three or four, but I don't know why it would be called “natu” (nature) by doctors.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, or if they have already been treated with cautery, use only a natural method for cauterization.
And you should apply cauterization to those unnatural humors.
And if it is necessary to treat a patient with cushions, they are needed for those who have pain in the legs or feet.
And if the patient experiences pain in their legs, they are likely suffering from gout.
Then put a poultice on the body to draw out the humors.
And if there is a need for a cushion, then apply it to the thighs, but place your hand on their legs.
The translation is: **Chapter 76**.
Then treat it as an abscess if the patient has a wound on their legs.
And if the patient has been healed by the use of other remedies, such as those we have mentioned, and it is necessary to apply cautery, it should be done on the thighs, and only when they are in good health.
When the time comes to open the wounds on the legs and feet, another cushion should be placed under their knees.
And if there are two or more cushions on their legs, they should be tied together so that their intestines do not extend beyond the body.
And then you put oil on their legs.
And then [the midwife] applies her hand to the patient's body.
And so you must consider the location of the pain in the body, and place a cautery on the affected area.
Mays es to say that there are other interpretations for the pain in the patient's legs or feet.
And so that he can help his patient, the doctor must place his hand on the patient's feet, for these are the places where the pain is felt.
Then apply a third cautery to the patient's leg if necessary, but be careful, not too close to the bone.
And if it's necessary to apply heat to the affected area, you will do so to alleviate the patient's condition.
And if the pain is felt in the legs or feet of the patient, the midwife will apply ointment to soothe them; e.g., those parts that are affected by the plague.
Therefore, if the patient's body has been affected by a fever, the physician would call it thus.
This is the first sentence of your provided text: “When the patient's legs are swollen from too much water, it is said that they have a disease called the "water-logged" or "damp" humour.
And so, cover both the legs and feet.
And if you have to treat a patient with a large “cap” (head) ...
And if it's the case that the pain is in the legs or feet, it is likely due to a natural cause; use forceps as needed for this type of pain.
And if the pain is in the legs, they should be treated by the application of heat.
Here comes the first source sentence in English:  If it is not complicated, you must be careful to avoid complications.
And lahors that you place cushions on the patient's legs and a cushion on their feet if they are swollen.
If the pain is in the feet, it will be hard to tell if it's from the cold or heat if you are feeling pain in your feet.
Hold open the patient's legs and feet so they are already opened.
Mayes the other joints are also treated with the cushion at the elbow, so you should apply a hot compress to the affected area.
And if the mouth of the patient is open, they should be cauterized as necessary to prevent inflammation. Then apply a bandage and place them in a position to prevent further injury.
Then if the patient has pain on their side, use the cushion on their sides and let them be treated by a physician.
When necessary, the surgeon will make an incision.
Then ensure that you leave no part of the body untouched.
And then, when the doctors have finished their work on your feet, they should be treated for coldness by applying heat.
And if you have to cauterize a patient's legs, use hot water and treat them with other cushions.
And I have seen women whose stomachs are swollen by pregnancy be cured by cauterization. It is said that if it's been a long time since an apoplesis occurred in the legs, it often happens to a man that his bowels are loose; and if he is prone to be affected by gout.
And if there are plagues that plague the legs for a long time, then you put a cushion on them and it becomes a case of gout.
Then you will have to place a bandage over the patient's legs or knees so they don't move, and another on their feet, so they don't move.
Then he thought about the bones of the deceased.
Therefore, treat them with the utmost care.
And you should know that when there are no more openings needed to be made in the legs, then a cushion is applied there for relief.
Then use a cushion to extract the fat from the patient's thighs.
Then apply heat to the legs, et autre on their body.
This is how you treat a swelling with another cushion, which is the best way to help it. But if it is necessary to use this medicine on the patient's body, it should be done by someone skilled in medical knowledge.
When a doctor applies a treatment to the feet, they would use a cushion to help apply pressure.
And if you are dealing with a blockage, use cautery to open the intestine by burning.
Give shape to the form of the body with a cushion.
And if you are making an incision on the foot, then apply forceps to their leg. But perhaps the intestine is affected by the disease in question.
This is what I have: Then you must open the wound carefully, using an instrument to do so according to the amount of pain you wish to treat.
This refers to the patient's condition, not their body part.
When the shape of the body is affected by the disease called gout:
and if there are other causes of pain in the foot, it's best to leave it alone.
and then apply the forceps to hold the patient's foot so that it is held in place. A hot poultice should be applied to the affected area.
The text describes using a type of cautery tool to treat a condition by applying it to the affected area.
Forma de unci having two points (of pain) are other.
If a patient has an inflamed joint, they are experiencing inflammation.
Apply cautery to the two thighs.
When all the instruments are used, and when you prepare for surgery, always use the least invasive methods first.
And so you should always hold the patient's legs in place when using these instruments.
Then apply your hand to the affected area.
And if the pain continues to affect the patient's feet, you must follow these instructions carefully.
And if you have already cauterized the other parts of the body, it is customary to apply herbs for treatment. These herbs are used for treating ailments in the foot, such as swelling, by applying them to the patient's body.
Then place a reed in the mouth of the mother to keep her from closing.
Then put your hand on the area already treated, and another cushion under their feet, and let them rest as much as possible.
If you have found that the pain in your feet is due to an excess of phlegm, then you should apply a cushion to their legs, and gently remove them from the affected area. Before applying a cautery to the wound, treat it.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed, her children are to be treated by medicine and herbs.
And if the woman has a pain in her body that happens at night, she may have a disease called gout, or they are saying it’s a sign of something else.
And if the pain is in the leg, you must apply a cauterization to the area to treat it.
May the patient be treated with the utmost respect for their health and well-being.
And if you want to make sure that the woman’s pain does not return, treat her with a cushion on their legs and another on their feet.
The patient's legs are already in pain.
And so that the body's humors do not become concentrated in the legs.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their feet, another on their legs.
Take care of the uninjured leg.
When your feet are cold, you should use a cushion to prevent the chills from the cold. Then cover the patient's legs and be careful not to touch the cushion.
You apply your hand to their legs; and if you have to put it on the foot, they should be held in a warm place and oiled.
The other hand must be kept on the patient's legs while the other is used to treat the feet.
When the disease has been treated, it is customary to call it gout.
When the wound is healed, the patient will be relieved.
And you have already put cushion on their legs, or if they are using a cushion for gout, put the cushions in a place where they can be found.
And a cushion is placed on their legs, because a cushion is needed for the leg.
When there is a build-up of excess white humors in the body, the legs become swollen and sometimes develop these ulcers.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's intestines, then do so on their legs.
And if it is necessary to make a puncture in the area near the foot, then apply a hot cautery.
A person's gut should be treated with a cauterization tool if they have a fistula.
When your hands are swollen, apply a cushion between them.
If you don't feel them all, it doesn't matter; they are no longer necessary for the process.
And then the other, the fistula, is entered into the bladder or on the feet, and that's what they call the cure for it.
Perhaps this means: "If it is necessary to treat an ailment with pain in the limbs, they are called 'le metges' by doctors."
The patient's pain in the legs will be healed by the cushion.
And if you are to apply a remedy, then it is expected that you will cauterize their legs, which is why they are using the word "pod" in that context.
And if you have pain in your ankles, that's what we call it.
Then apply the cushion to the place where the pain is located in the body.
When your foot has been injured by a gout attack, place a cushion on it.
Then, however, they are healthy in their old age.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body, it should be done carefully, so as to avoid burning them.
The patient's blood will be cleansed by medicine, but if you want to cure their condition, you need to treat the underlying cause.
And if it is a case of a disease that affects the flesh, it is called a "gout" from the beginning of the illness.
And apply a cushion to the afflicted area, and let it remain there for the necessary time.
And if a doctor needs to apply heat or cauterizing agents to the body, he must use a cushion for that.
And so you should apply that which is customary for gout to the affected area.
And use medicines that are good for the body, so to speak, to heal and stop the spread of illness.
If there are fistulas or hernias in the body, use a hot cautery to make them longer on the surface of the body, and if they are already in the anus, treat them with a special instrument.
So if you are applying a cautery to the top of the wound, and you are using it on the flesh, then you should be careful.
Then place a cushion on the wound so that it may be cauterized. Then apply a pointed cautery to the affected area.
And if the pain is in the joints of the leg, it is used to describe the pain as being in the joints of the legs, already treated with a cushion.
And if you have to make a caisson for the patient, you must adjust the cushion so that it does not burn the skin and place the other cushions under them.
And if it be healed, another servant will come to help the patient.
And if there are fistulas that are not already open, you should use a poultice to treat them.
This is an example of how a surgeon might treat a fistula in medieval times.
When there are wounds in the area of the anus, the pain arises from the blood vessels.
And if you wish to treat the disease, you will apply cautery to the affected area in the chest. And so if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, treat them accordingly.
And these also are the causes of the ailment, which are called humors in the medical field.
Then apply a cauterizing poultice to the affected area. And then you apply a cauterizing tool to the legs, so that the patient's pain is reduced by its use in the area.
Then, if the patient has gout caused by an excess of cold humors, apply hot cauterization to their affected area. And another treatment for the other parts within which the pain lies.
Then you will have to treat it with a cautery applied to the skin.
If they have gout in their toes, then they should hold their hand over the area to be cauterized.
Cautery is used on the hernia, which is then treated with a needle to relieve pain.
Then let the body's humors flow freely from the legs to the feet.
And place another on the patient's back, another cushion under them, and you will be able to tell if their pain is in the knee or a place where the cushion is placed. And if the patient has recovered from the injury.
And if you wish to use a poultice for an ailment that requires it to be treated by applying something on the affected area, place a cushion under them and put your hand over the patient's hands to prevent them from being held back.
Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area if it's needed; when the pain subsides, apply a cold compress.
Sapias that the author of this text is referring to the placement of tools during surgery, but don't know where they are being used or what kind of ailment they are treating.
And then he must place a cushion on his legs to prevent it from happening.
This one is already in English.
Then use a hot cautery to burn away the child's small intestine.
And you should treat it as a condition that requires treatment if there are cushions used for the pressure points in the legs and feet, and place a cushion under them. Then use fire or medicine to treat the affected area accordingly.
If a patient has a fever, it is believed to be caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, and if they have a swollen leg, then apply a cushion to the area around the foot.
Then, if there is a need to treat them, apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if you wish, make use of the hot cautery method or other treatments as appropriate.
If they have no other purpose than to cause an inconvenience to another.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's legs, use another cushion for the body.
And upon the patient's legs, you shall apply the instruments for cauterization.
This sentence seems to be describing the use of different types of medical tools on children.
Another hand on their hands.
The tip of the canula be covered by a cloth so the doctor's hand can hold it.
And if you have opened a vein in the foot, another method for treating the foot’s pain.
And if it is necessary to apply a patch to the animal's bladder, you can use a cautery of one finger's width.
And if the patient's foot is opened up for surgery, you will need to make a small incision.
Then apply cold compresses to the patient's leg.
Then elevate a cushion on the arm or leg, so that the patient is not harmed by its use.
And if the medicine fails, they are to be treated with a cautery.
But if you are healed by the other two, the pain will subside.
If you are suffering from pain in the lower abdomen, then the doctor will apply a cushion to their legs to prevent it from being caused by a different type of ailment.
And then for the treatment of the plagues.
The original text contains errors and inconsistencies. Assuming these are meant to be variations in spelling of "you" and "the", here's a possible interpretation:
This pain in the foot requires a cushion.
And you will do the same to their intestines as you did to their legs, or cushion them, or to treat them for that which is done by burning.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's body as needed, so that the cushion covers the area where the pain is located.
And if there is a hot swelling in the body, then apply cold compresses to the affected area.
He who has begun to feel unwell should know that there are treatments for diseases.
And if the pain is caused by a simple humor in the leg, then apply the cushion to the area affected by the disease.
And if it is necessary to burn the affected area, use a hot iron on the foot to stop the bleeding.
Then apply heat to your body and do not allow yourself to be near anything that causes pain.
And if the pain is caused by inflamed or irritated humors in the body, apply a poultice to its location.
The doctor recommends using heat on the affected area, but only if the ailment is recent, to prevent the opening from being too large.
And then put a cushion under their bowels when they are healed.
If the plague is severe or in the legs, then so be it, apply the lancet to the affected area to make sure it’s a proper diagnosis.
And so, when the plague is upon us, it is customary to treat the plague with medicines that are made for the patient’s ailments.
And if you have healed the injury to the bone, it will be necessary for you to cauterize all that is needed.
If you find that the patient has pain in their feet or legs due to a hot humor, but if it's not caused by a cushion, you will cauterize the body through the use of medicines.
And if these plagues are simple and on the feet, they are treated by the doctors as a case of gout.
Take one part of oil of rosemary, two parts of water, and three parts of the poultice is applied to the affected area.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, apply the remedy to the foot before the disease spreads.
Then use the appropriate herbs and poultice, and apply it to the wound.
And for these large plagues, use a bandage to apply pressure on their legs so they don't swell, and you can use other cushions on his chest, so that others are placed upon the affected areas, which are already inflamed.
And if the air has altered them, especially if it is summer, then apply a poultice to the affected area, and use other remedies as well.
And if the patient's illness is located in their leg, you must cauterize them near the bone.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's leg, then place the cushion on their knees.
When the body's plagues are caused by cold air or water.
If the patient has a fever, you can tell which part of the body is affected by its location.
If a patient has gout, applying cautery to the affected area should be avoided. Do not be afraid to use the cauterization technique for any disease or illness, but if the patient has pain in any part of their body, they should be treated with caution.
And if the patient has a wound, you should apply gentle medicines to it, just as if it were a cushion placed under their legs, to soothe it with a poultice.
If the pain in their legs is severe, apply cushions to their legs, and take care not to cause further complications.
If the swelling is severe, then apply a cushion to the lower part of the leg.
And if the artery is already cut open, then apply cautery to the area if necessary to stop the bleeding.
If necessary, apply a hot cautery to the affected area after a few days, if pain persists, apply it to other areas on the body.
Mays if the plague were to be upon your bones, and you are suffering from it, use this method for treatment.
And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the affected area. And if they are already healed from a disease in the leg, then the next day they will be treated for the plague.
If there are many blows to the feet, then the doctor will consider the pain caused by a cure from the other parts of the body.
And if in the foot, there is no recent inflammation, apply the poultice directly on it to cure it.
And you will put your hand on the patient's present ailment, which is a cushion for the pain in the feet (and perhaps apply) to be a remedy against the disease.
When the patient has passed three days without the plague or other symptoms.
If the pain in the foot is severe, you should apply a bandage to the affected area or treat it with a hot compress if it is necessary to avoid further damage to the body.
Then it is called a "smallpox" operation or a treatment by cutting, but if you are making an incision on the body of someone who has smallpox, you would use a cautery with a cushion to treat them.
When the intestine has been opened for a long time, it's customary to call it gout. And if they are afflicted by the plague, may the patient be relieved.
And for other ailments, it is customary to treat them with remedies.
And on the belly.
When there are problems in the intestines, they will be relieved by placing a cushion on the patient's legs and stomach.
and so forth.
E so if they are difficult to reduce, a cushion should be used.
And then you should sew the other openings on their body.
And then there are two other types of sutures, one for each of the other locations.
And you will apply a cushion to their thighs, and they are treated with other remedies.
And if it is necessary to reduce a joint pain caused by cold humors, then apply a cushion to its location as well as under the patient's legs, so that the pain will be lessened.
And so when the pain in the legs and feet is severe, the surgeon should use a cushion to keep the patient's legs from being affected by the pain.
When illness arises in the legs, the patient will feel relief from inflammation when they are cauterized.
And so when the patient's swelling is reduced by the application of herbs to their legs, it is customary to apply water to the area where they are being treated for a small amount of time.
This sentence refers to treatment with a medical tool and possibly a specific type of procedure.
And if you are a physician, you can treat the condition by using appropriate methods.
And if there's a need to use cautery on the patient, treat them with a hot iron.
Then, if the pain is severe, apply a cushion to their feet.
And then, if the plague is spreading and you see it on the surface, use a cautery to stop its spread.
Mays you have to place your hand on their chest if it's in the chest or upper leg area; for if it is in the legs, it's called a different thing.
And if there's a disruption in the balance of the body, then consider the following: ...
This line translates to: And thus apply your hand to the thigh of the patient.
When there are small pains in your body, put the smallest amount of pain on their legs, and place the patient's foot on the cushions to prevent it from being affected by the pain.
E questa que s’aplica als membres de la persona: el piez amb la forma del cuerpo.
Then apply another cushion to the other side of the needle, and if necessary, use a third cushion on their feet.
The first line describes how the condition described in the second line (the third one being similar) is treated by a physician using a technique called "making points."
And if the pain is in the legs, another method should be used by the doctors to treat it.
And so they shall not be allowed to be closed up again by the patient's body.
And if you have already opened the patient's legs, you should place a cauterizing tool on their legs to reduce pain, and they need cushions for their body, and another cushion to hold them down.
These types of stitches are best for small wounds.
The second translation: The second line is for the reader to attempt to translate the text.
Then apply the needles to the patient's four parts, so that the affected part can be treated with an additional cushion, which is placed under those areas when necessary.
Then apply heat to the area between the patient’s thighs, and another cushion.
And then this suture must be treated with caution.
And if it is necessary to place a cauterizaton on the legs, the intestine has already been opened.
The plague was cured within fifteen days or so, and the patient's condition improved.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's foot, it should be treated with a poultice.
According to Paraula, there are two types of sutures for which one should be used depends on the location of the injury.
And you must place a cushion on the legs of the patient, and put their hands in another position.
And if the needle penetrates to the extremity of the bone, lay the cushion at that point and apply it to the other bones.
If you are making points on the intestine, they will be called another place.
And if it is necessary for you to make incisions into that which is in the foot.
And then apply to the other side of the body, which has not been cauterized, as you would to that side.
And so you should use a cauter to create another burn on the body to prevent further injury from the disease.
Then you place a cushion on their legs with the same method and apply cauterizing tools to close the wounds.
And if the second type of pain is similar to that which occurs in the foot, then you should treat it accordingly.
When your doctor needs to make incisions in the foot, you should have already prepared the incision site.
Then apply the hot cautery to their legs, and another for the rest.
And this method of suture is better than the common suture, which was previously mentioned.
The foot is that which is affected, but the other translations are incorrect.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause swelling in the joints, use a sharp instrument to make small incisions to release them, and apply a cautery to prevent the abdomen from being infected.
You only translate that which requires it by the translator's knowledge.
And the treatment for plague will be given to those who are judged.
When the plague is spreading and you have to deal with recent wounds, here is what the doctor recommends.
And so if the air is cold, I will treat the patient for the pain in their legs.
When plagues are simple, then the remedies can be applied in small doses.
Then apply a cushion of lion's mane to the affected areas, if the patient has a weak constitution.
When gout affects a person, it is called a painful inflammation of the joints.
And you would know that pain in the lower bowels is easier to heal than pain in the intestines.
Then you should apply heat to the affected area.
May it be that the cushion for the plague is placed on their sides.
When it is necessary to use bloodletting, it is best to draw blood from the ankles or thighs.
And if the plague is in the legs, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then apply heat to the leg, and let the other parts be remembered by the cushion.
If the pain in the joint is caused by cold humors, it is possibla to make a diagnosis of a fever and call it gout.
Then apply the treatment with a cushion to the intestine, as it is customary for gout.
And if you find that the patient has a lump in the groin area, and they're experiencing pain from the injury.
The text describes how to treat a patient suffering from what appears to be a type of swelling or inflammation in the foot (likely a reference to gout), suggesting that a cushion should be used for support while the other treatments are applied.
And another cushion should be used on their legs, and another to hold them back in place, as needed.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
This text appears to be a mix of Italian-like words and some that are not recognizable as such.
Then use this method to prevent further complications from the swelling and pain.
When the plague is great and widespread, a doctor cannot cure it, but he can treat it.
The text is likely discussing the treatment of gout.
Sapias that if it is necessary to make an incision in the foot, you should use a pointed cautery.
And if it is a true fistula, it is a hole or opening in the body.
And if there are sharp pains in the body, these are treated as an acute pain in the legs. And sometimes this cushion stops the swelling in the legs and prevents it from spreading.
When in doubt, it's best to consult a doctor for diagnosis and treatment.
And let me know if you want to understand how to treat a fistula.
And if you want to make points on their body, you must use a cautery for that, as described in the text.
Therefore, the patient's humors are being treated by various methods.
If you are ready to use your hands to treat it, then apply another cushion to the wound.
Mays then the patient's fistula be cauterized to prevent its spread.
Then you have opened a vein to treat them.
Then put a cushion under them and apply another cushion to their legs and place one on their feet.
You have already used your hands to examine the fistula, but there are other uses for them besides diagnosis.
And thus, they say, you should use the nearest surgeon for the operation.
Then return the patient's foot to its place in the body.
And if the fistula is on the leg, use a surgeon's tools to cut it open and place a cushion beneath it, and ensure the patient does not have their hands near the area.
And if there are other symptoms present in their legs, then these may indicate a different condition than gout.
Aproxio a la persona le cushion for a better understanding of its condition.
Mays so be that you cauterize the area according to how the doctors do.
Then examine the patient for the cause of the fistula, and treat them as you would their legs if they were suffering from a disease in the foot, but only after the inflammation subsides.
If the intestine is affected, then treat it with a poultice.
Then if it is not healthy, you should apply a cautery to the affected area, but only after consulting with experts.
And therefore if it's healed, you don't need to apply cautery to that part of the body.
And if the bone is diseased or corrupted, then you must use fine forceps.
And if the pain was caused by the release of humors from the body, it would be necessary to apply the cautery to the part affected by the illness.
Then apply a cautery to the ligaments or flesh if they are in pain.
Then you must apply heat to the affected area.
Another way to say it is:  For the green herbs, you apply them directly to the affected area.
But if the heat affects the skin so that it becomes infected, then use a cautery to stop its spread and apply a poultice.
When joints are corrupted, it is necessary to place a cushion on the legs so that the disease will not affect the marrow of the bone.
Then you may apply cauterization to a man, but only on his thighs.
Then make a cushion for a young man to use on his legs when he needs one.
Then return to the cushion under which the patient lies, while others hold their legs still, apply the cautery to the affected area.
And then the doctor will call upon you to cure the ailment.
And he would see the patient's body through his use of a cushion, which means that they were making progress on the battlefield.
And then use a cushion to support the patient's feet.
Then bring your hand near the patient's body, and place a cushion under them to support their injured limb.
And then place a cushion on top of the bone where the patient's pain is located.
And now, place your hand on the wound in the leg and another on the bone.
Then if it is necessary to cauterize the bone, but the patient has already been affected by gout, the patient's foot must be supported during the treatment.
And then, after a while, apply cauterization to the affected area to restore its health.
And if the patient is suffering from corruption of the body, then apply cautery to the legs and place a cushion there.
Then, if the patient has not been cured by the application of cold, it is necessary to apply heat.
And then the physician will apply cautery to the area, little by little, until the bone is restored and healed.
And it is not necessary to make a cushion in the operation of removing his humor, but rather he must be given a cushion for the pain to subside.
And so the patient's condition improves when they are treated by a skilled physician.
And if you are to perform surgery on a patient's leg due to an ailment caused by a buildup of cold humors in the foot, you should use cushions to separate the body from the bone.
And if the pain is caused by cold humors, they are to be treated with cauterization.
This means that if there are signs of inflammation in the legs or feet, it is called gout by doctors.
If the disease spreads to the legs, a physician should be consulted immediately.
And if the bone is diseased, the other one will be used for the treatment.
Continue to cut into the affected area until the pain subsides.
When there are ulcers or wounds on the legs, it is not considered gout.
Then apply cautery to the affected area according to your judgment.
"Then return to the patient's case, and prepare the intestine for surgery."
Then you must call them gouty, if it is an illness of the limbs caused by cold humors, which are common in the disease known as the "disease of kings."
And then you should place a cushion on their legs, for they are to be treated differently than the feet. And if it is a pain in the foot, it is customary to treat it as gout.
When there are other causes of pain in the joints, use a hot compress on the affected area.
A form of large saw.
This translates to: Another thing to be careful of is that the cushion is applied correctly, and the patient needs to use their hands to move the legs.
It is only proper that a doctor be called upon for gout if the body's humors are corrupted.
A form of minor razori was used for treatment.
This indicates that the razor should be used on the patient's legs.
When your form is affected by a severe pain, and you have already placed a cushion on their legs, apply cauterization to the area to relieve the pain. Another form of the ailment is called gout.
This refers to a method of treatment using a sharp cautery.
This phrase refers to gout.
This describes the shape of a gouty joint.
When translated, this would be:
And so, the patient's legs are now ready to be cut into.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs, it should be done carefully, so that the intestine is not damaged.
When the body is being treated with cautery, it is customary to apply a cushion for cushion-related pain.
This time the patient's pain is described as sharp and located in the triangular area at the base of their spine.
Then apply the ointment, which is applied to the affected area.
And here, place a cushion under the patient's affected joints.
And when the cushion has been used to treat the corruption in the body by applying those medicines, then apply another medicine to the corrupted leg.
When it happens to the leg or foot which is the person who is affected by gout.
And similarly if it is necessary to make cuts with a hot iron on the legs of the patient, they should be treated with another type of treatment.
And if on their fingertip you make an incision, and you open the space for the wound to drain.
And similarly if you are going to operate on them, you should apply a cushion to their chest, preventing the intestine from being touched.
Then place your needle into the arm of the patient, within the joint where the pain is felt.
And if the pain is in the joints, and another cause is present, apply it to the area affected by the disease.
And similarly, if it is necessary to apply cautery, you should apply it to the legs for the aforementioned reasons.
And place your hand on the foot to prevent pain. Then apply a hot cautery to their feet.
Then apply a cauterization tool to the affected area, for the person should be kept alive.
Then, you will separate the legs from the other member.
And if it's necessary to protect the patient from infection, make sure they are covered in all parts.
Mays you apply cauterization to the affected area when the pain arises.
And apply it to the affected area as you would a poultice.
This person treats the first person's feet as if they were his own, which is why he was called upon to treat the ailment.
And then the physician placed their hands on the patient's thighs to prevent them from being affected by other things.
Thus, he has found the cause of the pain.
Lonc temps has a Latin feel:  "The phrase 'Long's' refers to the legs, but the word order suggests a more natural language ordering would be 'Long's legs have been affected by this disease.'
A cushion placed on their legs will help to soothe the pain.
And if they are called upon by another, you shall apply heat to them.
And if the body is affected by humors, they should be treated with remedies.
Then apply this knowledge to treat the patient accordingly.
On their treatment with another cushion under their bowels and legs.
And if it is necessary to apply a hot iron on the patient's foot, for which one must be careful.
However, if the pain continues in other parts of the body, it is called a fistula.
And so that the patient does not suffer further complications from the illness.
Then if you want to treat the legs or thighs, use a hot cauterizing tool to draw out the bad humors.
And if you have been affected by a disease of the bowels and they are producing a foul odor, then it is called Egyptian gout.
And you have applied a cushion to their legs, and lay them on their chest, and let them rest there for two hours.
And then apply heat to that area.
Then return the water into the body by using a cushion under their legs.
If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian treatment, then it's likely the patient has a problem with the specific type of medication used in Egyptian medicine.
And if the illness is in the feet, one should place a cushion there to prevent further injury.
And then apply a hot poultice to it.
And if there be a need to widen the area where the needle is inserted.
And if it seems to be the case that the orifices are open, do not treat it as gout, but rather as an injury requiring stitches.
When the body is affected by cold humors, it is called gout.
Then prepare the arm with the proper remedies to prevent further harm.
Mays treat the patient's foot with remedies and apply another to their chest. And when it is necessary to know if they have suffered from gout in the past, you should determine if the patient has previously had a cauterization.
Then you must now consider if the patient feels pain in that area, or if there's an injury present.
Then apply this treatment in this manner, and place your hand on the affected area to avoid further inflammation from the condition.
And if there is a virus that affects the flesh, it is called generation in the flesh by doctors.
When the stomach is affected by excessive humors, it is called indigestion.
And if you are applying a treatment to an area on the body that has a cushion, place your hand under the patient's affected area, and use the same treatment method.
The Translation 3: Apply your knowledge to the patient's legs, with cushions and bandages; apply bandages on the affected area after using cautery to prevent swelling.
And sometimes these remedies are used for gout in the bowels or legs.
And if the pain continues, then it's gout, as described above.
And they shall apply the cushion to the area of the foot affected by the gout, and another cushion to their legs.
The bones are made of their own substance, and the first one, the bone of the foot, is treated with a cushion.
Then apply your hand to the affected area to prevent further complications.
If the bone is clean and the nail is healthy, if the foot has no other ailment, then they can be treated by placing cushions under the knees to prevent them from being burned.
And if there are any who have been cured of corruption in the bones, that's a good sign for them.
Then treat the affected area by placing your hand on their legs to prevent further complications.
When the body is afflicted by gout, doctors call it "the disease of the foot" and treat it as such.
And if they are sick, apply cautery to the affected area, but only after removing the cause.
A pointed pain in the region of the feet is a type of ailment that doctors call gout. And when one has been born with bad blood, they are said to have gout.
And for those who are born fleshy, they should be given a cautery to their legs, and the rest of the body should be treated by other means.
Mays the pain in the patient's feet be difficult to treat.
Mays, you should apply the cushions to the legs, for at the beginning, are there not also a round incision on the foot of the patient?
Then, if the pain is caused by cold humors in the intestine, place your hand on the area to prevent the body from becoming infected or inflamed.
And if you separate the patient's intestines from their legs, it will be consolidated in them.
And similarly if you have applied cauterization to their legs, etc., then apply your hand on the affected joint in that way, as though the pain were to be stopped by a bandage.
And from the cut, that's where they are to be treated for pain.
Vices can be found in various forms, such as varicose veins that are often caused by the body's humors.
Then, use colonic irrigation to cleanse the body's veins and apply a strong purgative.
And there are two ways to treat a person with gout: drawing out blood from the legs or letting the patient have another treatment, such as a cushion for support.
The first part of the treatment should be done in two ways: first, treat the whole body with heat, and then apply a cold compress to the affected area.
And then he orders to be avoided those foods that cause black death.
E venis per la forta curacio.
This text describes the process of treating a condition that might be gout, which involves applying cushions and bandages to the affected area.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's right side, you should put another hand on their legs and one on their feet.
And so that the other part of the body of the sick person does not appear in the area where the patient has pain.
Therefore, when you are ready to apply the remedy, another person should hold the patient's body and prevent them from moving during the treatment.
And you will apply the point of a hot iron to the patient's legs, which may cause them to be raised, if necessary.
Then apply a cushion on their legs or other affected areas to ease pain.
Then you must elevate the foot and place a cushion upon their leg and apply heat to the affected area.
And then apply the cauterizer to the cauterized area.
And if you are unable to elevate it, use a needle to draw out the pain and then place a cushion on their legs. Apply a cushion to the wound on the leg; if it is a painful condition, then use a cautery tool to seal it.
And when the patient's intestines are inflamed, the rest of the body should be treated to prevent further complications.
And if the veins are already constricted, place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet so that the vein's inflammation can be controlled.
Hold your guard, for you must be careful, lest the intestine be harmed.
Causing pain in the feet, which is what doctors call gout, can be caused by various things.
A person should not be burned by a sharp instrument, but rather by a gentle one; otherwise, they will suffer from the disease of the veins, because it causes the pain through its sharpness.
On the legs.
This disease is caused by the heat in hot countries, just as the term applies to the cold humors that are found there.
And if a pain in the legs is caused by humors getting out of control, they should be treated differently.
And if it is necessary to mark the body part where a person has pain, it is done by the physician.
And if the pain is in the veins of the body, then it's called a vein problem.
And then when you have applied the poultice to the location indicated by the word 'gouts', apply another to their feet and another to the legs.
And if there are pains in the legs or elsewhere due to some ailment, apply a cushion to the patient's affected area. If there are any signs of illness, you will have to wait until the patient is healed before you can apply this to the feet again.
The patient should be treated gently, lest their condition worsen.
And from this vein they are applying cauterization to the leg.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on the body of a patient who needs surgery.
When a pain in the joints occurs, it can be treated by applying a hot compress to the affected area.
And if they are suffering from gout, you should treat them accordingly.
And when dealing with a worm found under the skin, it's called bovine disease.
In some places they call a painful condition that affects the joints arthritis.
And if you are not able to keep the intestine in place, hold their legs in such a way that the intestines do not come out.
When the heat rises to the head, it affects the whole body and can cause dizziness.
And if you want to heal someone with such an ailment, apply the treatment to their foot, which is a part of the body where pain should be treated.
And if there is a need to cauterize the flesh, you should apply the cautery in the manner that we have already described.
Then return to the body (specifically the legs) after applying a cushion to them.
This refers to a surgical procedure for treating an ailment related to their body.
This disease which is called in our land gout, can affect some limbs, or cause pain to move from one limb to another.
And I will see to it that the other one is treated by the other. And I saw a small vein in her arm, which was previously swollen, but after an hour she had no more pain.
Then the pain settled in their legs and thighs, and you cauterized the pain there.
And then carefully apply your hand to their leg so that the pain of gout spreads to the other arm as well.
And then the patient should be careful to keep their hands on their legs. When I burn them on the thighs. "And (the doctor) will know if a woman has the condition, and apply the treatment accordingly."
And if you're already treating the leg pain, it should be treated with water, or the other way around
And thus the patient's gut is protected from the veins being affected by the cautery.
The phrase "placed a cushion under them" refers to applying a hot poultice to relieve pain in the legs and feet.
Then, if you do not apply them to the patient's thighs, you should use another cushion for their hands to prevent the pain from spreading.
On treating gout.
Arrows are used for different types of pain in the body, such as that experienced in the feet.
And if a patient suffers from a severe attack of the gout, it is necessary for the physician to remove the arrow, which is a sign that they are about to be purged of their bile.
And so if the wound is prepared, then you should avoid cauterizing it, unless it's necessary to burn the wound to remove excess tissue or a foreign object like an arrow embedded in the other side of the body.
This means that if pain appears in the left foot, it is known as gout.
And when the cushion reaches the lungs, it is said to be the plague.
And thus the pain will be made to lessen if a cushion is placed under the feet to prevent them from being too hot.
When the stomach is affected by the arrow or pain from the stomach ache, then you should use a cushion on their stomach.
The patient has no chance of survival if they are burned with a cautery on their abdomen.
And if there be other cause for pain in the legs or for leaving the body out of its own control, it is called paralysis.
May the pain be felt in other parts of the body, such as the legs and feet.
Then you will see the patient's body is affected by other ailments.
The above-mentioned causes are also called the following:  in the case of a man, the pain in his legs is caused by a cauterization burn, and if he has a cushion on his thighs, the cushion is to be applied to the area of the affected leg.
When the patient has a pain in their legs or feet, it is called gout by doctors.
When the Juzieu has an illness, it is a bad case.
And if you have placed another cauterization on the patient's thighs, e which are already caused by a cushion, and then put your hand on that place to keep it in its place.
And it is said that if the gouty pain is in the legs, it is called "gout" in the man's body, which is what it is.
And if you are treating someone for gout, it is best to use a cautery.
The woman's bowels were troubled, but she was not experiencing any pain from her natural functions.
And if he has a wound in his legs, they will be treated as necessary.
And so that the arrow may be removed from the man's right foot (which was previously treated) and the arrowhead is in the hand of the man, a cushion is placed under his head, and another on his right side.
And you have to expose your legs to the air for three days.
Then I found the other arrow wound was on my thigh; I felt it was painful, but there was no sign of the plague.
And apply a poultice to that place on the body.
Let us see if the arrow has reached the body. If it has, then you should apply leeches to that area.
Then apply another (treatment) with a gentle touch to prevent further pain.
And then, if it is necessary, one should cauterize the patient's legs with a hot iron for four months.
When you have a wound that needs draining, apply a poultice to draw out the pus.
The doctors were already using another type of cushion for the patient's pain, but they were not yet ready to be cured.
E tu as to use quality in the treatment of the patient's ailment.  Translation: And then, you have to apply the rules of this art with care.
And if the patient has a fever and gout, the physician will treat them in one way or another; the same applies to those who are treated by a physician.
Therefore, I say that arrows are drawn from the body in two ways: either by removing them or by pushing them back in.
And if you make a cut on the leg, or elsewhere, it will be necessary to put your hand on the wound.
And if there is no improvement in the space of a few days, it is necessary to consider using a cauterizer on the affected area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the feet, lay them open for several days and apply a hot iron to the surface.
And if you don't put ointment on your legs, the patient will be in pain for days.
When the arrow is hidden, it is already under the influence of the magnetic force that attracts it to the target.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area to help extract the arrow.
And if it is possible to place the intestine or cushion in a way that allows for the removal of the stone, then apply heat to the body's joints to prevent it from being placed on the patient.
Then apply your hand to the wound so that the arrow doesn't come out, leaving the other parts of their body untouched.
Then let it remain for several days until the patient's pain subsides. And if there is pain in the legs, you administer to the patient as was previously done.
Then do as you are able to keep the patient calm; and if it is necessary to use a lancet, proceed with caution and care for the patient.
And so the doctors were accustomed to call it (gout) when they had to use a pointed cautery. Then apply a cushion to the affected area if it's necessary for the patient's comfort.
This text is describing how to treat gout, a condition that causes painful swelling in the joints.
If the illness is in the leg bones, one must be careful that the arrow of the disease does not pierce through.
And let it be left open, that of the other intestine to the one who has gout.
If the pain is in the foot, apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays if you were to apply a cautery directly to the affected area, then that would be your instructions for administering it on the patient's feet.
Then you will apply a cushion to their abdomen.
If you see a quiver, apply a cauterizing tool to the wound.
And if it's necessary to apply pressure on their legs, you should place another cushion under their feet, and avoid pressing on the other one, which is already in pain.
This sentence appears to be in a language similar to Latin, but with some differences that suggest it's not purely classical Latin.
Let the patient be treated for their ailment by using a cushion to support the body.
And if a patient has a pain in their foot, it's treated by applying heat to the affected area.
So too if pain is in the legs, should the cushion be used for cauterization.
And about bloodletting from the veins.
And so on their arms are made incisions by those who practice it, and the vein in the foot is called the "aspicient" (from Catalan "aspí"). And if it is necessary to cauterize a vein, they call it “vein of the foot”, which is how they call “the veins” in “the case of la.”
And there are three humors in the legs; one is that which is under them, one is below the knee, and another is placed at the top of the thigh.
The pain in the feet is caused by an excess of bad humors.
And if he has a bad case of gout, then apply a bandage to his legs.
Then you apply the spatula to the patient's leg, then place a cushion under them. And if it is necessary to raise a vein, apply a bandage to elevate it. And if it is a cut in the legs, it is called "the two points" by the doctors who have been observing it.
Then place your hand under them on their thighs and apply a bandage.
And already they have begun to cauterize the affected area.
When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to do two things: apply a hot cautery or use a cold cautery.
You are talking about a condition that causes pain in the legs or feet.
And elevate the leg so that the leg can be raised above the heart.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, et use another cushion on his legs, et another on his feet.
And so it is that we are reminded of the subject, which is to make an incision on them, and at other times to keep the remedy in place.
And so if the need arises, the physician will use lancets to bleed the patient's legs.
And the quality of their work, which is to be made known by the surgeon.
The patient’s illness is caused by an excess of humors that have infiltrated their body.
And it is by opening the intestines that one can treat them for a variety of ailments.
When the body is treated with a cautery, it should be applied to the face for skin diseases, if necessary.
The quality of the bandage is important for preventing infection in the legs.
Then apply the cauterization to the patient's arm.
And if it is necessary to make the patient run their blood as much as possible.
And may the patient's nose be opened to the veins of the face, and especially to the old vein diseases.
And if the patient's illness is so severe that they are unable to move their limbs, then it is called palsy.
This sentence is in Occitan, and it means "Use your hands to gently open the space between the patient's thighs."
When there are many more wounds on the body than just those of a commoner, they will be called by a different name.
Then the quality of the treatment depends on the location and severity of the pain.
And then the vein of the legs will be opened through cauterization.
And then apply a cushion to the sore place.
And if the patient has a fever from vein-cutting or other ailments, such as boils on their legs or feet.
And if there are small veins that show signs of illness, they will be treated with cautery.
If there is doubt about what kind of ailment it is, it is called gout.
And if you have already opened their veins and found them to be full of humors, then cauterize those which are in their chest.
This text, likely from a medical treatise on bloodletting, describes how to apply a cushion to the patient's thigh while performing the procedure.
And if it is necessary to elevate the foot, treat the veins.
Then you have to use another method.
And the other cushion-like methods used by the doctors are either performed on the feet or legs.
And apply the other methods of treatment to the veins as well as those who are in pain, e.g., venesection for bloodletting, and use a poultice for bleeding.
And for this reason, apply the other cushion to their legs.
Mays you have to apply cushions to the patient's legs and hold their hands while they experience pain in the feet.
And if it is necessary to perform a bloodletting procedure on someone with that illness, be careful not to injure the patient's foot or leg.
And if the appendix doesn't show itself, then seek it elsewhere in the body, or apply a bandage to it.
The bloodletting should be done to the hand if the patient has a fever that is caused by an excess of bloodletting in the arm.
So if you see the need to cauterize a joint, apply the heat to the artery there.
And if you see blood appear in the cautery, then cauterize it immediately, for that is a sign of hot blood.
And if you see a wound in the leg or foot, take care of it for several days until it heals.
Then you must place another cushion on their legs and apply it to the area where there's a vein.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, then do so; otherwise, the patient should have their legs kept straight to prevent pain from the movement.
And if there is a wound on the foot, another possible explanation is that it is caused by a burn from the cautery.
The bloodletting should be performed on the arm.
And if blood is seen to be in the vein during your phlebotomy, it will be difficult to treat the patient's swollen foot.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization between two nerves.
Leeches are used for bleeding, and to draw out the blood from the body.
> And if the pain is in the foot, it is called gout; or, to be more precise, a surgeon would call it that.
When pain in the foot is severe, use fire cauterization on their legs.
Then at the beginning of the illness, the treatment should be applied to the veins already in the spring of life.
Then let them be treated with phlebotomy, and the pain will subside after three hours.
Tota la persona’s veins are prone to pain.
And if you have a wound on the leg, it should be treated with a cushion for support.
And if it is necessary to remove the pain from the body by applying a cushion on the leg, but the patient has pain in the belly.
And if the patient is suffering from a disease or drunkenness, they are likely to be a person with gout.
Then, consider if the patient can be treated with hot water and poultice.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's leg, apply a hot cautery to the area.
So apply the tourniquet to their legs and let them know when it's time for the third hour.
And so the animals should be kept away from the bowels of the earth on that day.
And if you have to use a cushion between the patient's thighs, then use another cushion on their legs, one under their arms and one upon their chest.
Therefore, if it is necessary to cauterize, the surgeon should use a cushion to protect the patient's chest from the burning flesh, and apply the hot iron to the affected joint only.
Then place a cushion on their arm so that the patient's arm can be cauterized.
And if there is a stricture in the leg, you should avoid aggravating it by applying too much heat or pressure.
And if there is no use in making points on their legs, apply them to the chest instead.
And if the patient is in need of a cushion for the veins, another cushion should be placed on the leg so that the veins are covered by it.
Therefore, the physician uses a pointed cautery for all these ailments.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the veins, you must do it carefully, because if the vein is not properly opened, or if the heat is too much for a delicate part, another cushion will be needed.
And if you must apply heat to the area, do so with caution, and be sure not to hold it there too long, lest you burn the patient's foot.
Then apply bloodletting to them.
And if the patient's need for bloodletting is small, you may repeat the procedure on the incision site.
When a doctor cauterizes the bowels, they are treating gout. And for this pain in the legs, it is better than others.
And so, if a vein is affected by this kind of ailment, they should be treated with anti-inflammatory remedies.
E en le loc a cushion placed on their legs will cause a great deal of pain.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, it's on the other leg that the patient needs treatment.
And if it is green or black, then apply the metatarsals for a few days, and use a cushion.
"Then apply hot compresses to the affected area and you should hold their hands."
And therefore you must apply pressure to the affected area if you have another cause for the pain.
And let the cushion be placed under their arms, and let them apply a cushion to the site of the injury so that the wound heals well.
And so if you have to use a cautery on the patient's legs, place it under their legs, and another, and put a cushion under their legs, and another that is placed over the quantity of blood.
And if you apply heat to the body's humors, then they will be healed by applying the opposite, which is cold.
And if there is a need to make cuts for bloodletting, then prevent them from making extra cuts on their legs.
And if the patient's pain is caused by gout, it is important to treat them accordingly.
And if it is necessary to make an incision on the vein, it is customary in venesection.
This method is better than bloodletting for addressing an ailment in the foot.
And if you wish to make bloodletting a cushion be used under the patient's thighs, etc., as in the case of other illnesses; then apply leeches to their feet.
Then apply cauterization to the area to prevent the spread of infection.
Then open the wound by opening the veins in the foot and apply your hand to the affected area.
And it is treated by other means than evacuation.
If you want to treat the patient, you should use the appropriate methods for their condition, such as placing a cushion under them.
Mays that the patient's arm be cauterized for a second time, after it has been opened, e.g., by incision, and the patient's bowels are treated, and another person is present.
Here comes the second sentence:
Mays, when a pointed object touches the area where a patient has been cut for the bloodletting, they will be called in to see if you have an opportunity to treat the patient with this procedure again.
And if you are treating a wound on the arm, and it is difficult to cauterize due to its severity, use a cushion on their hand.
When the patient feels pain in their body due to bloodletting, they should apply a compress to the area where the leech was placed.
You have already heated the area between the legs.
If there is an excess of humor in the body, you should use a cautery to treat it.
And then apply a cautery to the veins of the arm, applying pressure to prevent bleeding.
And if the patient's illness is such that their intestines are affected, apply your hand to the area below their feet.
And then apply a bandage to the patient's foot; otherwise, they might have pain in their legs.
The bloodletting instrument should be applied to the vein, and if you open up the leg, apply it to the larger area, and then apply it to the legs or a smaller incision for a small incision.
Then apply heat to the patient's legs and feet.
If there are no other reasons for the pain in the patient’s legs, then it’s likely caused by an excess of humors in the limbs.
And so the use of this vein for bloodletting has been deemed safe by doctors, as it is not a vein that pulses.
When the right side of the body is affected by pain in the intestine or liver, it is often called jaundice.
The patient's strength be increased by this method.
And if you are to place your hands on any part of the body, be careful not to touch the flesh with the other cushion.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the area around the patient's thigh, it is better to let the blood flow freely.
And similarly, when using the cautery on the legs, one should always be careful to apply it carefully and ensure the patient's body is not harmed.
And if the left hand is affected by the illness, apply a cautery to it.
And for the treatment of the legs, another method used by physicians was to cauterize them.
And it is to these diseases also that the patient's body is subject.
And if a cushion is needed for the patient's leg, apply heat to it, and when the bloodletting is done, put another on their chest to prevent the veins from being infiltrated by other things.
Therefore, it is better to call it a fever if there are other signs of illness present in the patient.
Then you should open the body with the use of a cushion in the chest area.
And if bloodletting is necessary.
When cold humors are present in the body, they cause pain in the bowels, which is what we call “the waters,” and you should know that this is a type of treatment.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first incision, he should repeat the process on the second incision site.
And if it is a problem with the nerves or a nerve-related issue.
And so, as doctors usually do, apply a poultice to the affected area, and treat the other parts of the body in the same way.
And there you have the bloodletting of the afflicted person's limbs.
And the nature of the illness of the patient is such that it can be treated by the physician's assistant using lancets, but also by placing their hand on the area of the ailment.
Therefore, when using a hot cautery, one should apply it to the area of the body, carefully placing it under the control of the surgeon's knife, which is the best way to ensure precision and minimize risk.
Then apply a cushion to their back, where necessary.
And if the patient's body needs to be treated, apply a cautery to their legs.
Then apply the cushion and place your hand on their leg, one at a time.
The ways to use the cautery tool are described.
And for corns, you should apply cupping therapy.
There are two ways to apply cautery: one by cauterization, involving both cutting and drawing out the blood.
Then place a cushion on fire under their feet.
And if you want to be a doctor, you should use these fourteen places for applying leeches; and use other methods, like bloodletting, on the rest of the body.
Then apply cauterization to the veins only, leaving the blood vessels in the body untouched.
The text describes using a hot cautery to treat a condition that occurs in the feet or when a person has gout.
Therefore, when you have to make a point on their legs, they are already three hours in.
And if there is an opening where the skin has been broken on the back of the neck.
This pain in the legs is treated by applying leeches to the affected area.
And if there's a need to apply cauterization to their body, it's necessary to use a special type of cautery for that.
And by that which is proper to each part of the body, and those who are old or young will be treated with cushions.
And if you must apply a cushion to the patient, tell the person applying the cupping therapy to do so carefully.
This medical practice and the use of cushions for the patient's comfort are mentioned in other languages as well, like the French.
And if you are suffering from a fever, it will be necessary to apply a cautery to your stomach.
And so the physician applies a cushion to his legs, and the patient’s feet; et autre on their eyes, and another on their arms; the other to the head.
And let it be known that the patient's legs should be held steady during treatment.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's gums, they should be cauterized in both corners.
And if you have already cauterized the two sides of the body, then you should cool the area after.
And if you wish to bleed the patient from three veins, use the leeching method as they are described in the text.
And if the patient has a fever, use a cushion to protect them from the heat of the cautery.
And apply cupping to the legs and another one to the ulcers of the lower leg, which are treated with cautery.
When ordering a person to apply cupping therapy, use subtle cups on the skin, as they are suitable for the treatment of the feet.
This translates to:
For otherwise they are called weaklings.
And from their legs, to the body, they are accustomed to be treated.
And when you apply bloodletting to the affected area, do so carefully. Then return the cushion to the patient's legs, and hold them still.
And then you should apply a hot cautery to them, slowly at first.
When a man suffers from gout, which is in the legs, place a cushion under their legs and use another method to treat the pain.
And command the doctor to perform a bloodletting.
And if there are humors in the body, use a cautery to apply it delicately. When the patient has a wound on their legs, place a cushion under them.
If the blood is too thick, use bloodletting to thin it out.
When you want to treat the affected limb, gently apply a cushion under the patient's leg and another on their foot.
And if we want to draw out the blood for a cure, let us use a cushion and apply a poultice.
And that is the depth of the pain in the legs, but only one person's.
When the weather is hot, use aloe or oil for their placement.
And if the flesh is swollen, apply a poultice to it.
If the pain is in the joints and is caused by an excess of humors, you should know that it is a disease called gout.
The pain in the feet is caused by cold humors, so if you have to apply a treatment for that, it is done with a poultice.
And for those who have large amounts of phlegm in the legs and feet, use these remedies:
When there is inflammation in the body, especially in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
Quid est quod ...  et cetera.
At the beginning, you must consider if the patient has already been diagnosed with gout or something else.
Then apply heat to the legs to prevent the intestine from getting cold.
And if the patient has a fever, they will be treated for an excess of humors in their body.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, they are treated with a poultice and another's major ebullition.
E beure, o mas que l' ha tengon:
Mays these be cures for diseases of the liver and other such ailments as gout in the feet, which should be treated by means of a cautery.
And if it is necessary to translate from the first leg, it is better to cauterize the legs and feet than to call it by its name.
And then you've used your cushion to support their legs, so they don’t move during the treatment.
E semblantment fa when you cauterize the liver or spleen.
And these cups are applied only to the surface of the body by suction; the other parts are treated with fire.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area if necessary.
The body was tended to by the other servants.
Forma de ventoza es a cushion for the pain in the feet.
Then place a cushion under their head, keeping the patient's position stable.
And if the patient has a limp, another problem in the body's system.
And if it is this disease called gout; and if it is caused by a cold humor; and if it is a problem in the legs, put cushions under them.
And place the leeches on the child's legs to draw out the fluids in their limbs as needed.
And the quality of making a cauterization with fire on the body is that it is done to treat a few burns caused by an internal source.
A cushion should be placed on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading.
And if you have already opened the space on the legs to the other one.
Then return the patient's intestines to its cavity, and place them back in place with a cushion on their legs and another on their feet, but use the word "ventosa" for this purpose only when the patient's condition is such.
This means: When there is pain in the legs, make a larger cupping.
Chapter 97.
Gout was a common ailment among the wealthy and powerful in medieval times, hence the name "foot disease" for a condition that could also affect other social classes.
And if they have been treated with a cauterization tool, then the patient will be healed by applying a poultice to their affected area.
And if the patient has pain in the day and night, they are to have a cushion placed on their limbs and be treated by a physician.
Then apply your hand to their legs and feet.
And if you can already reach the affected area through the use of another method, just use that instead of a cautery.
Then, if there's a need for it, apply a warm compress to the area between the thighs and wash the affected area with vinegar; then cover the leg with a cloth that has been moistened with hot water, and press on the affected area with your hand.
And if you are suffering from cold humors in the body, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
When blood is thick and dry, it's called a "blood clot" by doctors.
And so, if necessary, you should use leeches, carefully applying them to the area where the blood has been drawn.
And so if a needle is placed on a recent foot, it will be in a place where the blood is drawn.
When you want to burn them, apply a poultice of ashes or something else to the area.
And thus begins the treatment for the third part, which is restoration. This chapter is necessary for understanding fractures in the practice of medicine.
Oh, son, this chapter will be of use to you for doctors in these days are often called upon to treat gout.
And if they are in pain, then place a cushion on their feet;
And if it is customary for doctors to apply cautery to the limbs.
Then I have already explained the workings of the stomach and its ailments.
Chapter one.
And the first thing to be done is to apply the cushion to the legs, and another to the patient's feet. When translating medical texts from medieval languages, it's important to remember that these texts often used different terminology than we do today.
Then use cautery for such injuries, whether to the feet or other parts of the body, as doctors do in these cases, and apply it to the patient's leg, using a similar method for those requiring a cut.
And if you have a cushion for the joint pain near the leg, or perhaps on the thigh itself to prevent further damage, put it there.
And then if you have made the opening in the legs, which is the place where the pain originates, put a cushion there.
And if it's necessary to treat a broken bone, it's important to use a proper method.
If there are no other signs of illness in the body, then this indicates that the patient has a problem with the intestine or the groin.
The patient's strength prevents you from closing their wound.
And for this reason, physicians consider it necessary to apply a cushion to the patient's stomach when treating them for gout.
When you are treating a patient for a broken bone, you can use different types of cauterization depending on the location.
And I have seen the patient already suffering from various fractures, their pain distinct from other ailments.
Mota diversitat means that the patient experiences pain in several parts of their body. E so the pain in the joints is called arthritis by doctors.
And if the patient's leg is opened and a hot cautery is used, they must be careful to hold their hands in a way that prevents them from remembering the pain.
And then you have to apply cauterization to their legs. This is a description of bone fractures being treated by cauterization, which was a common (though incorrect) practice in the past.
Therefore, when there is no apparent twistedness or inflammation present, the patient has no gout.
If there is no pain in the joints, then it may be called a mild ailment.
And so you are told, if a wound in the body forms a curve or two, then apply a hot poultice to prevent it from becoming a boil.
And when the pain ceases, let them continue to be treated as if they had an abscess.
And if it's the case that the humors are cold and damp, then it's already a good sign that the patient has a cushion under them for support.
Then apply the second, a hot iron to address the pain of the legs.
Sometimes gout requires the use of two or more cords to be used for treatment.
And so let your hand be placed on the patient's body in such a way that they are relieved from pain.
And protect the patient's body from being harmed or pierced by the force of your hand.
Then, you will be able to use the patient's own strength and courage to address the cause of their ailment.
Then make a violent movement to remove the cushion that is placed on the feet so that the patient's bowels may be relaxed or intestines may be drawn back in.
The patient's foot suffers from gout if they are experiencing pain in the joints due to gouty inflammation.
And for those who are small, use a fine cloth to apply the treatment.
Then you have opened the area around the bowels and the patient's legs, thus making their belly button a good place to apply heat.
And if the patient's condition requires it, the intestine or the part of the body affected by the ailment will be treated.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound on their legs. Then apply your hand to their cavity, slowly extending the patient's body.
Then take a bandage and wrap the affected area to reduce the swelling.
Then you place a cushion on the affected area if it is necessary for healing.
Then, when there are other ailments besides the swelling, you should use cautery to treat them.
And be that which is done to the body by the wise physician, in order to make them well.
Then apply bandages to the affected area to secure the fracture.
Then you use a hot iron to cauterize the skin and stop the flow.
And then you will place your hand on their stomach (or abdomen) so that they do not feel pain in the abdomen or thighs.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Sometimes the first sign of a problem is that the patient will experience pain in the feet.
You know that in the past you've used a cushion for seven days in a row to elevate their leg, but...
This is how to make poultices as used by the ancients in the past.
And if it is necessary to apply compresses, it is best to do so by applying the compress on the affected area.
And if you treat that which is in the legs or feet, use a cushion on their knees to stop them from being so afflicted.
This is a tricky one! If we translate the fourth sentence in your example, we can see how to approach this:
This describes how to treat a patient suffering from a fracture or injury to the leg, using a poultice and other remedies.
And they are to be treated with a cautery after being burned.
And if it is necessary to use a bandage on the legs.
When it is necessary to make an incision, it is called podagra.
Then apply poultices to their feet; poultices are made from poppy and fig leaf.
Take a handful of mallow leaves; take other herbs of your choice and apply them to the affected area, such as those mentioned in the recipe for the treatment of wounds from a wound on the leg.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, use it on their legs.
A treatment for a swollen or inflamed area on the body using herbs and water from a well.
This sentence refers to the use of a cautery tool and mentions a specific method used in treating a patient with a broken bone.
This sentence likely describes a medical procedure involving the use of a hot iron to cauterize a broken bone or part of the body affected by a condition similar to the modern understanding of a hernia.
And if you wish to treat a person who has gout, you should apply a poultice.
If a patient has pain in their joints, which are affected by cold humors, then one should consider whether they have been afflicted by gout. Then apply heat to the area where the pain is located.
And apply a cushion to the affected area.
And he has placed the cushion on their thighs.
Then you will open the abscesses up so that they can be treated with a cauterizing tool.
When the joint pain has subsided after three to seven days, the patient should be kept under observation for potential complications.
E ayusta en la cushion under their legs, et another on their feet, to adjust for the specific cause of the ailment.
When fractures are caused by dry weather, they should be treated with a poultice to dry them out.
If a joint is dislocated, the body will be treated again by them, and a doctor should treat it as they see fit.
For I have seen that it is more reasonable to say that it was done by a physician's advice.
Of course, you know what it means to have a wound on the second part of the body, which is the head.
And the causes of fractures are diverse, and some are caused by the leg being struck, and some by the leg being injured.
And the pain in the legs is from the cold.
This bone is broken or fractured; the surgeon must place the broken pieces back together and keep them from moving.
And it is called a fracture when it occurs in the bone.
And if it is necessary to make points on their body, they must be done with a tool that is properly called a cauteri.
Then apply heat to the affected area, but be careful not to cauterize the wrong part.
And if there are fractures that cause pain in those areas, they are called by doctors "fractures" or something similar. And let the patient's leg be held in place.
And so you should know that all pains are caused by an infiltration of the flesh, and other symptoms may occur.
And the type of gout that affects the bones is known as a disease by physicians.
Mays if the stomach or bowels are affected by pain from so-called "cholera" of their own kind, then the physician should consider its nature.
And if it is an unexpected injury, it's customary to treat it with a cushion.
In the case of a patient who has already suffered from gout, one should treat the area with leeches according to medical tradition.
If you apply pressure to the area where the pain occurs, it will be less painful.
If a wound has already been made on the legs, the bone must be treated as you would usually treat it.
And if you are prone to pain in the legs, use another method.
And if there is a disease in the body, it is necessary to apply a poultice, which is applied to the affected area to treat it.
And there are two ways to perform an operation.
Then you apply to the bone another type of treatment, which is slightly more direct than that.
And then apply the second-line treatment to their legs, using a cautery for surgery.
And therefore it is necessary to know that some parts of the body are more susceptible to having their humors released than others; some have a greater intensity of pain in the region of the feet.
And if they are burned by a hot iron, then you can relieve the pain with other treatments.
And if the bone is strong, the doctor will apply cautery to the patient's body.
And if you call the state of the patient’s condition anything other than gout, it is because it is already open and there are no cold humors.
And it is convenient that you place your hand on the joint pain, which is to say that it is necessary to apply heat to the area where the affected part of the body is located, because it is advisable for the patient to have a cushion placed on their legs.
Then apply the treatment according to its kind.
And if the patient's foot needs to be treated for pain, they should use a cushion to elevate the affected area.
And so that you should carefully protect the patient's legs from being harmed.
And if the bone is pierced, the surgeon will continue to cut into the area until the patient's pain is relieved.
You have already opened the area between the patient's legs.
And if the other (the patient) is suffering from a severe pain, then you should apply heat to the affected area.
Then return to its place the already treated hernia (of the patient's) so that the stomach does not protrude.
And use a hot iron to burn them on the legs for pain relief, while also using a cushion as needed.
When there are other causes for pain in the legs, one must be careful to avoid applying a cautery to the wrong places.
Then place a cushion on their legs so they don't feel pain, because the body has been marked for you to apply it there.
And if you are to use a cushion for your own protection under these circumstances, you must ensure that the patient's body is properly treated.
If you are a doctor, treat meys in a way that suits your expertise and my needs.
And then they are all the better for having studied that art. And so if you are writing about a cushion for the foot, then you must write about cushions.
When pain radiates in the veins, only then apply a cloth to the affected area.
And if you wish to avoid a cushion being placed under their legs because of this superfluity, then continue to apply it as needed.
Then place your hand on the affected area, and use a cushion to apply these medicines directly to the plague.
And if you have the ability to treat them well, it will prevent the plague from spreading in their body.
E quindi considerat le 10:00 PM.
Then if you apply medicine to a black area, it will be healed by the power of that medicine.
And by and by they placed a cushion under them, and then put a hot iron on their legs to prevent their legs from being affected.
On treating a broken foot.
And if the pain comes from the foot, and is sharp, place a cushion on the chest or under them, so that the body's humors are not aggravated.
This is a tricky one! It looks like you've provided a snippet from a medieval medical text written in a language that resembles a mix of Latin-based languages. And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the affected area for pain relief, do so with a cushion to stabilize the patient.
And if the fracture is in the most noble part of the nose, then you have to apply a cushion to the nostrils.
Then apply the plaster to the two parts of the body.
And if possible, restore the cushion (of the soul) for a cure, otherwise, treat the swelling as a boil.
If you are applying a hot cautery, put it on the nose, but only if there are no fractures in the area.
And if the ancients are to be believed, then that is called gout.
And sometimes there are inflammations in the nose, and for this reason, the patient must be cauterized.
And this cause is not necessary for you; but if someone wants to, they should use a cautery on their feet.
And if it's necessary to treat a wound again, apply a cushion to the area.
If there are signs of inflammation, apply a poultice to the affected area, and leave the other two alone.
This is a bit tricky without knowing more context! Here's a possible translation, but it's a good example of why translating from these sources can be difficult (it's hard to translate accurately without knowing what the author meant by the "other" and "cushion" metaphor).
And if the patient has a fever in the nose, you will have to cauterize them, and their condition may be from that.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated.
"Then" the bone in their legs is fractured, the surgeon should take care to set it properly within its cavity.
So if the fracture is on the left side, then apply your left thumb to the left leg.
And another on their thighs, and two to treat them, and the other one that you have opened up the jaw.
And you have already applied gold or silver filings to the broken tooth.
And the physician shall order the patient to be given a cushion, and it is said that he should rest his hands on the bed or table.
And if you feel pain in your feet, put a cushion on which the patient will sit, because already a cushion is placed on their legs.
And so if the cushion applied to the bones is not loosened, it is considered gout.
And then if you have another bout of the condition we mentioned, apply the same treatment again.
And if the fracture is in the area where they work on the leg bones, it's called gout.
And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, let the patient be cauterized in the quantity of their need.
Then apply a hot cautery to those who are affected by gout, and apply another cushion to the other parts of the body.
Chapter 5.
This refers to the restoration of health when a patient has a pain in the joints, which they believe is caused by an imbalance of humors.
This refers to the three types of fractures that can occur in the clavicle (the bone referred to as "motes" in the context of the provided text).
The English translation of the provided text is: When there is pain in the joints, which is caused by an excess of cold humors, it is called gout.
And then you should apply a cautery to the affected area in order to treat the fracture.
And then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from suffering further injury.
And if there is no cushion under the patient's body, then use your hand to hold them in their place.
And if you cannot apply cautery to the already inflamed area, then you should use a cushion for support.
And you have pressed on the injured area, and then applied pressure to the bone with your hand, following the instructions of the physician.
And so you treat them for weakness in their shoulders and arms.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's bones, you will use the cushion; then apply the cautery while the patient has their hands on their hips.
And if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, it is customary to cauterize the wound.
Mays the pain be alleviated by the operation; may the pain be lessened in the legs and the feet.
And if the patient has a disruption in the bones from the boil, you should place a cushion on their legs and another on their foot, as needed.
And if there is little disruption, you should apply a cushion or bandage to the area affected by the plague.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area if a wound or boil appears.
And so you should check if the patient has a fever; if they do not have a fever, it is called gout; if they have a fever, put a cushion under their legs.
And if the patient has been injured in their chest, apply a bandage to the area to support the wound, and use a cauterizing tool on the chest, but only a little bit.
And if there is a pain in the leg, do not use cautery on the area unless it is necessary.
And apply a poultice to the area if the patient has a cushion under their legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area for 28 days, and then apply a bandage.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
This refers to treating a fractured shoulder.
The spoon is broken in the place where the patient's foot is not located.
And thus when the joint is broken, you know it by the way the bone is fractured.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and place your hand on their side, using your hand to help guide the treatment.
Mays if your hand suffers from a second cushion.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected legs, keeping them still.
And consider the foot in its entirety, whatever you have softened or heated on their legs and another part of the body.
Then place a cushion around the affected area.
The patient will be healed in twenty days or more.
And then when it is done, you will know that the bandage should be removed.
And if you must treat them, it is said that the doctors should treat the bone spurs first.
Chapter 7
Of the restoration of fractures of the foot.
When the foot is injured, apply a poultice to its surface and another cushion for support.
Then apply heat to the surface of the foot, as this will cause inflammation and pain in the area.
And if it is necessary to burn away the excess humors, use the pointed cautery.
When a patient is suffering from the pain of being treated for a broken bone or a wound.
When the humors are caused by something that affects the limbs, such as the foot, it is called gout.
Chapter 8.
And on the treatment of wounds on the body when they are infected.
Only the doctors know how to treat the swelling in the joints by applying a cushion to the affected area. And let the patient's legs be covered.
If there is need to repair the damage from the injury
And if the fracture is in the intestines, place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet.
And so apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to their belly, so that the patient’s bowels are comfortable and the bloating subsides.
And if it is necessary to make a point, or cushion, for gout, the doctors say that they must be treated carefully.
When there are no more humors, the patient's condition improves.
Then place your hand on the patient's body, making them feel comfortable.
And if you open the foot, which is the cause of pain in the foot, apply cauteri to the patient’s legs.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area.
You have already opened the translation:  "You have already opened the area between the patient's thighs, and if the patient has a cushion under their body, it should be placed to make a bandage."
And if the humor is cold and needs to be drawn out from the patient's body, it will be healthy again.
This is a description of a medical procedure, likely referring to a surgical treatment for a condition related to gout.
The restoration of the vertebrae in the back (and neck).
And if it is necessary to use cautery on the legs or arms, you should use it in a similar manner. And when you are already aware that a patient's pain is not cured by traditional methods, then use other remedies.
And if you have pain in your foot or knee, then apply cautery to cauterize those areas.
And so you will know if it heals or not by the way their spine moves.
If the patient has pain in the legs when they are cold and the patient's knees and thighs are touched, it is customary to apply cauteri to the affected area.
And if it's not due to any of those causes, it's better and less severe.
And if you cauterize the affected area, it will be said to be healed.
And thus, you can use a poultice to soothe the pain, but only if it is necessary.
If your foot is swollen due to other causes besides gout, then you can apply a poultice to the affected area; if it’s due to another injury, you should treat them accordingly.
When you have a broken bone, it's best to use a cushion on the leg to make it easier to apply a bandage.
And if you experience pain in your legs, place a cloth on them and apply a burning iron to it only after the patient has been cleansed.
Chapter 10
Then apply the treatment for an ingrown toenail on the affected toe.
And if the bones are broken in the foot, it is necessary to use a poultice on them; the patient's bones will be treated with a hot cautery.
Then you should place your hand on the affected area to prevent further injury.
Then return to the patient's body, placing your hand on their legs, and another on their feet, the intestine being returned to its natural position with the help of a cushion.
Then place your hand on the long bones so that they are ready for healing. E then apply a hot iron to the area where they are already treated.
Then apply a hot iron to their feet for as long as necessary.
When there are wounds that need cauterization, you must be careful to treat them carefully.
Then treat them as such for a proper treatment of the body.
Chapter 11
This is a difficult one! Here's my best guess at the translation:
When your shoulder is affected by the body's humors, the doctors will call it a wound.
Then, if the pain occurs on the legs, it is known as gout, which should be restored by restoring them to their natural state.
Two extremities should be placed on the patient's legs to help them.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, then the other cushion is placed on the other leg.
And if the patient's legs are swollen from illness, one should place them in their proper position for the treatment of that swelling.
And if you wish to have them burn your hand with fire, you should put a cushion under their other leg; and another one of the ministers should hold their arm near the wound.
And if you want to make the pain stronger, use two cushions on their legs.
And if the patient's muscle is injured near the joint, another cushion will be needed to cover the affected area.
Similarly, if the wound is near the foot, apply a poultice to the wound on the leg, since it is there that the pain is felt.
Then apply a poultice on the affected area to treat them.
This sounds like a recipe for treating an abscess, using wine and rosemary as remedies.
And place a poultice on their body to reduce swelling; if you want to apply a bandage, do so.
Then apply pressure to the affected area, and if necessary, use other methods to prevent further complications from the injury.
And so you must use herbs.
And you have opened the space above the knee for the application of the cautery.
And then strength on their legs, which I have mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And so if there is an injury to your leg or foot, it should be treated with strict cauterization. And when pus accumulates in the lower part of the leg, it is called the sciatica.
And so if you see that the patient has a displacement of the legs, and the pain continues in the legs.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs and another to the feet.
And if you consider the nature of the injury to be caused by an imbalance of humors in all parts of the body, then it should be treated as such.
Mays three days must pass before you can remove the cushion from the body.
And if the patient has pain in the stomach, the physician should keep their chest covered.
And the cushion under the patient's body is placed there to hold their position.
Then place a cushion on their legs, so the patient's leg will no longer be swollen.
Here comes the translation:
And if it is a lay fracture, treat it with a poultice; if it is a case of gout, another treatment is necessary.
Another is placed on their legs and another on their chest.
Then apply a bandage to the arm, and bandage it up.
The patient's legs are opened and a cushion is placed on their knees.
And so, the pain in the feet is relieved by applying a hot poultice to the area.
The doctors would say to heal the small wound, use a gentle touch.
And when there's a break in the bone, it is called a broken bone.
And two of those who have bad luck are already in place under their legs.
Therefore, if a doctor deems it necessary to cauterize the vein, this should be done on the exposed area.
When the fire burns strong, it can be used to treat ailments caused by heat in the body.
And if you cauterize the patient's feet, they are to be given more force or pressure.
And if you have to treat the intestine, do so by placing a cushion on the affected area.
And for him, let the doctors be in their places already established by custom.
And another applies a cushion to their body, and holds their hands.
And place the bones back in proper alignment.
And if your body's structure allows it, let the physician use their skill.
And if you hope to burn away the excess humors from the surface of the body, use the cautery in that manner.
So if the injury is to the foot, it is called gout.
The patient must be kept warm, so you have to apply a bandage with a poultice of oli and beeswax at the beginning, if you put a bandage on a very large area affected by a painful ailment, and the patient has their hands over the wound.
And if the patient has a broken bone, you should know that the stars are in a very bad position.
And if you wish to apply a cauterization, put a cushion under their legs and place the other on the limb, and another cushion under the other leg, and the patient should be laid down.
And if they are the cushions that are rough, then use another linen sheet.
And consider the following to be a member of the limb. And if there is a need to apply heat to the affected area, do so after placing your hand on it.
And let the cushion be placed so that the legs are bound to the cushion.
Here comes the first line containing the translated sentence:
Then apply a cushion to the foot to prevent the humor from leaving the body.
Mays al malaute no cove is another form of the word 'cushion'.
And you have already placed a cushion under their legs, so they can sleep comfortably.
And if a patient has a pain in the joints, or a wound that needs treatment for 32 days, it's done with a hot cautery.
This is a guide to understanding how to properly translate the text.
And if it is necessary to treat the foot and its parts, place your hand on them.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma, e no another?
And if your body's fluids are unbalanced, causing a problem in the feet.
And then the doctor will see if they have good or bad humors in their body.
Then apply a poultice and bandage to the affected area.
When you are in pain from a disease that causes the bowels to be affected, they should wrap your wound.
And if the body is opened, the physician should be careful to apply the correct amount of cloth to the legs.
Then if a bone breaks in your leg, you will have to put it back together yourself because if it's a simple wound, use cushions to support your leg and foot when they are injured.
And if there is a fracture in the legs, apply a cushion to those limbs, so they are not injured by the cautery.
Mays es, then apply a bandage to the affected area, after which he should keep his hand warm.
And in this way, the patient's bowels are treated by applying a cushion to them.
The text uses the word "cambas" which likely refers to legs in its original meaning.
De costuma, for a fracture of the bone in the thigh, you must use a cushion to support the leg.
The bones are broken by the cold in the legs, and they say that the pain felt in the feet.
The patient is laid down on their back, which is why they are already in pain and need to be treated with cauterization.
And if he has a cushion applied to his legs or feet, they will be more comfortable.
When a man is ill, he should be treated by a physician, while others are merely given to a surgeon.
And if the patient's bones are inflamed, they should be treated with a poultice and another on their legs for each other part of the body.
And a physician must treat the patient's humors so they don't get out of balance; that's what he does. This is about treating an illness using hot cauterization, which involves applying heat to the affected area to drive out the infection.
Then apply a bandage to the wound.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area to keep the intestine from protruding.
And when you have already opened the wound in the leg, place your hand on their ankle to prevent the bone from being fractured there.
Then return the patient's legs to their place and another cushion for them.
Then place a bandage on the area where the leg was injured or on the limb, if it's a case of the gout.
Then place two cushions on their legs to prevent the intestine from being damaged.
Then you'll know if a patient has a truly corroded intestine, which can be treated by cauterization, only then should they be given such treatment.
Then you must carefully apply cauterization to the legs, so that the pain may be alleviated.
The following are translations of the text provided:
Perhaps in the above case, you are referring to the patient's legs, and another cushion should be placed there.
And if they have a fever, it is customary to use a poultice after forty days or more or less, depending on the nature of the illness.
Chapter 15.
When the patient's injury involves the dislocated shoulder, it is customary to treat them with hot cautery.
When the body is cold, or if there is swelling in the legs, cauterize the tendons.
Then apply cautery to the wound, but not in the case of a fracture or opening of the body cavity.
And then the patient will be restored to their natural state.
Then place a poultice and apply it to their closed eye, and use the cushion for the other ailment.
Then we'll consider other treatments appropriate for those ailments.
Chapter 16
And then you will restore the broken leg.
When there is pain in the joints caused by cold humors, it is called gout, but also known as a disease that affects the legs and feet.
And if you place a hot cautery on the patient’s arm, they will be cured by its use.
If the patient's bones are broken, their pain spreads throughout the entire body.
And if the patient has been burned by a hot cautery, it is applied to the legs.
And if it is a bone fracture that causes the pain, it is necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, and another to stop it from being broken.
Then apply a poultice and compresses to the patient's legs.
But if the break is in the leg, it is customary to use a hot iron on their legs, which is good for healing.
When you need to treat someone's legs, which are swollen from gout, apply a cushion to the knee or knees affected by pain.
And then place two bandages on the affected leg, one above the knee and the other below.
And place a cushion under their legs, three in total, to prevent swelling.
Then place a cushion under them, and use another to hold the patient's foot in place.
And it is most important to cover the wound during treatment with a poultice if necessary.
Then apply a hot poultice to prevent the swelling from worsening.
When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
And placed a cushion under them.
When there is pain in the body's joints, it is called a "pain" by doctors.
Then, if the bones of the leg are fractured, they should be cauterized.
Then place a cushion on the foot where the pain occurs.
Then place a poultice on the cushion and another two on their legs.
Then put your hand on their foot to prevent them from getting another illness.
And when three or four days have passed, then you should know how to treat them.
This may be an explanation of how to treat a wound on the foot. And cushion the affected joint, and place a towel on their legs to treat them.
You have already opened the foot for a treatment appropriate for gout.
And so you should know that all the reasons for pain we have mentioned are also reasons for using a cautery on a wound.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
And if you must treat ailments, use the hot hand to treat them for the woman and the cold foot to treat the other (likely referring to a specific treatment method).
When a woman's bowels are affected by pain in her feet, apply it to the rest of the body.
And thus the midwife will place the woman's womb back in its place as if she were healing an injury; then she will apply her knowledge to prevent the woman from being opened again.
You have already placed a cushion under their feet, so they should be able to urinate easily. Then, they are to be treated according to their needs.
Let the patient have seven days of rest, or thereabouts.
And if you use an ointment on the patient's legs, apply it with a cushion; the others are for the rest of the body.
When there's pain in the body or if they are afflicted by gout, the doctor will usually apply a hot poultice to help.
And if a bone is broken in the legs or feet, you should cauterize it.
And in the case of this injury, it is important to place your hands on their limbs.
And thus it is that the intestine of the sick man, when a cushion is placed on his legs, he can be healed by applying heat to the area.
Chapter .xix.
For restoring fractures in the bones.
Translation: And if you have opened the door to illness, then apply a heated cautery to their thighs or other areas affected by the condition.
Then, if the disease is caused by illness in the body's humors, you must treat them with remedies to stop the spread.
And if the injury is an infection in the joint, then treat that first, before using a cautery.
When an abscess forms in the body, especially on the feet, it should be left alone for three days.
When the bone is eminent above the surface, apply a cushion to reduce the swelling and apply heat to the affected area.
Mays tu placed your foot on top of a cushion for his comfort, another one for the patient's comfort, and use the other tools to treat his condition.
And in this way, the patient's body will be healed through the proper application of heat and compression, as well as by applying pressure to the area with a cauterizing iron to prevent the pain from spreading.
Apply heat to the affected limb if the doctors think it's needed, but apply a cool compress elsewhere on their body.
And then you have already identified the cause.
And in Greek it is called "labre volentz atelat", which means “labyrinth” or “maze”.
And if a patient's leg needs to be treated for a condition that causes swelling in the feet.
And then apply a poultice to keep the joint in place while the swelling subsides.
Then apply fire to the affected bone if the joint pain is caused by a cushion on which you place your hand, for the patient.
When it is not possible to reduce the pain in the patient's foot, use a cautery on the leg or other parts of the body that are affected by the same ailment.
And then apply a cushion to the area of that pain and put your hand on it for the patient's legs.
And if the patient's bone is still painful after being returned to its natural state, it should be treated with cauterization.
And if you wish to avoid further damage, the other options are for the treatment of your body by making use of cautery points to heal them, and apply a bandage to prevent further complications.
And lay your hand on their abdomen to apply a cautery there, and then apply another in the same way to the legs.
Then if caution is used, the patient will be healed by the removal of the plague from their body and the use of a cautery on their body to stop the spread of disease. And if you have to apply heat to the area, use a different method because they are different.
Then if you have a great pain or are afraid of their illness, treat them with a strong dose of cautery.
When you treat a patient suffering from plague, use the same methods as if the plague were in the feet of our own body.
Then you should know that if someone has a problem with the disease in the foot,  it's customary to apply a cautery treatment.
You'll need to apply a hot poultice on their feet if they are suffering from gout. And from those that are caused by injuries, they are extracted or reduced through the use of another cushion.
When the disease spreads in the body, a cushion should be placed under the affected area.
And a surgeon should not presume the treatment of gout as a mere matter of course.
Nothing in the provided text suggests that "Capitol .xx." should be translated literally, so it likely refers to a chapter number in the treatise.
The cure for a swelling that occurs after an injury or fracture to the foot.
This is how you would say if a person has pain in their legs, they have a pain that is often referred to as gout because of its association with the joints.
when there are recent signs of illness in the legs and feet, it may be necessary to cauterize their humors but some say that they should use a cushion to apply a cold compress, and others say they should use a hot compress.
E apert le canal so that they can be used for surgery or to treat those ailments which are treated by opening the legs.
And if there are signs of pain in the legs, they are usually treated with cautery on their feet, some other areas being treated as well; et autre on the head etc.
Chapter .xxi.
And if the patient's legs are not restored to their proper position, they should be placed back in place and another one on the foot.
And after the bone has been fractured, you must restore it to its place with many causes for which it is necessary to be careful.
This line is likely about applying a poultice to draw out illness from the body.
Then apply a poultice to the area so that it heals naturally.
Another option is to translate the sentence into English.
And for the treatment of broken bones, they are healed with difficulty by the doctors.
If the intestine is affected by gout, it may be necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
This is a common treatment for those who have gout, which causes pain in the joints.
And recently, they are called "recentz" gouty pains.
And if it is necessary to apply a light cautery to the patient's legs, it should be done gently and carefully.
And if it is already twisted or knotted in the part of the body that is below the waist, it becomes a problem for the surgeon, who then must be careful to make the incision only on the knotted area and avoid damaging surrounding tissues.
To treat the intestine or hernia, apply heat to the area to draw out the bad humors.
This phrase means “When dealing with a patient” followed by “of gout”.
Gout is a condition where a physician places their hand on the affected joint to treat the ailment.
So when there is a dislocation, it must be corrected quickly, so that the patient will not suffer from pain.
And for that reason, the legs should be kept together to prevent the pain from spreading.
When it comes to the use of cushions for medical purposes, it is said that the cushion should be applied to the affected area.
And the cushion is placed under the patient's legs, so as to prevent the surgeon from being able to cauterize them.
E aloc yeus to use the most appropriate tools for treating the patient's injuries.
And then apply cauterization to the affected area.
From its dislocation, the jaw must be treated.
The physician will first attempt to find out the cause of the swelling in the joint or joints before performing surgery.
When the pain in the legs is severe, it is often enough to cause gout, but it can be caused by other things.
Maybe you should say that if the dislocation is complete and severe, the patient needs to be completely treated with a bandage.
And then cauterize the dislocated joint with the cushion placed on both legs.
When there are cold humors in the body, especially in the legs, apply heat using a warm cautery to the affected area.
Therefore, when you have returned from applying a treatment for them, they are in pain due to the humors being released.
If the pain is in the legs, you may apply heat to them directly.
And you should place a cushion under the patient's hand.
Then you will know that the reduction of the intestine in le following hours will be difficult because of the pain.
And when you are experiencing pain, put the patient on cushions or pillows to prevent them from being uncomfortable.
Chapter 25.
And to reduce the dislocation of the shoulder blade bone (scapula) from its place in the body, they are reduced.
The fork in the road is no longer a place for forks; now it's for the best way to treat the pain.
And the restoration of the health of the patient is that they are treated by doctors. And if the space is closed, you will be relieved from pain in their legs.
And then apply a poultice to draw out the pain and a cauterization on the joint.
May the small intestine be healed.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, hold their hands down and apply a bandage.
And so if this treatment is followed, the extremity will return to its normal state.
E aprop reduzeys le cos per la necessitat del metges e du the body is to be understood as being used in the same way as a doctor would use the term "metge" (which means "doctor").
And on the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the doctors know this as gout, if a muscle is strained by a pain in the knee.
And if there are other reasons for the pain to be caused in the leg, and the other reasons are cold.
And for a good understanding of what is meant by the term "gout" in the original text, the doctors are mentioned.
When a man's foot is wounded by gout, apply heat to his legs.
Then, if you are applying cauterization to the feet, the other parts of the body should be covered.
And so the pain in the foot is known as a very specific type of ailment.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area, and when applying a poultice for the pain, you will find the cushion needed no further cushioning, as other methods were already in place.
And of this dislocation a slight reduction should be made to the knee, and the foot should be kept in its proper place.
And the minister carefully cauterizes the patient's feet to stop the pain from spreading.
Perhaps if the pain is in the legs and does not return to the top of the leg after treatment, it will be necessary to use a bandage or other method to secure them.
Then the physician will apply a bandage to his/her skin and place them on their legs to hold the patient's hands over their wounds.
Then place a cushion under his legs, and another under his arms, to protect him from the pain. Mays if the patient has mild cold, then we know that the pain is caused by something other than the condition of the patient already having a cushion placed on their legs.
And so you should apply your hand to their long legs.
And if the patient's condition is difficult to treat, use that same force on their legs which you would use for a pointed tool.
Then apply a cloth around the patient's legs.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's body and place the cushion on their legs.
And if you are working on the leg, place a cushion under the patient's body, and the other way around to extend the leg.
And when the preparation of the poultice is done, it must be applied to the patient's chest, so that the patient's body is restored to its natural state.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected area of the body, it is customary to use a cushion.
Then, if you have already done so, apply a cushion to support the patient's legs and feet.
See Translation 2.
And if at that time the patient has been unwell for seven days, it is customary to loosen the bandage after seven days so that the nerves do not tighten and are not affected by the pain.
The treatment for this condition varies depending on the location of the pain.
And if the pain occurs in the legs, it should be cured by that which brings relief from the ailment.
And if the patient's condition requires it, they should be treated with a poultice to soothe them.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the patient's foot or leg, depending on the location of the affected area.
This refers to the treatment of a dislocation in the leg or foot.
The original text seems to be describing the symptoms and potential treatment of gout by a doctor.
Then, if you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, it will be difficult to reduce the swelling; if there is swelling in the other joints, it is even more difficult for them to heal than any of the other types of ailments.
This is the ancient way of saying "the intestine" - "to have possibily something in his legs."
And if a dislocated joint occurs at the front of the body, it's called a dislocatation.
And if the dislocation doesn't reduce easily, they should use force to help put it back in place.
And that you place two ministers on each side of the body, and a cushion under their arms.
And apply a bandage to their arm to prevent further swelling.
And when the physician has already opened the area of the joint, it is called a "cushion" (cuscinate) because they place something on their body to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then apply whatever you have to reduce swelling under their legs, as needed.
Then release the patient's hands; if necessary, remove them from the space between the legs and place a cushion under their feet.
When there are many pains in the body, including the feet, apply a cushion to their legs and use your hands to hold them in place while applying a bandage.
And if you wish to apply heat to the affected area in the legs, use the warm-up technique for a gentle approach, or apply a poultice to the affected area, both day and night. And if it is necessary to place a hot cushion on them, you will be able to guess that it's a cushion for applying to the foot. Then return the intestines to their place, using cushions and placing your hands on them to ensure they are properly placed.
And if you wish to apply a cauterization, make sure to place it on the area where the burn will be dry and not spread.
**Capitol .xxviii. Translate the following into English: The pain of the joint is caused by their humors being out of balance.**
Treatises: Treat the body properly and use cushions to prevent the leg from becoming injured.
Sometimes a pain in the joints can be cured by applying a cushion to the affected area.
And if you are a doctor, and have to put a cushion under the patient's knee to make their condition more comfortable, then return the table for the legs of the patient.
The correct English translation should be:
And so it is good if it is treated quickly; but if not, then leave it alone, for the body will naturally heal itself.
This appears to be a combination of Italian and Spanish medical terms from the 16th century or earlier.
And if the intestine be inflamed or swollen, apply the cushion for 5 days; then remove the cushion and apply a cold compress to the foot for 7 days.
Then apply heat to it, if necessary, to make it less painful, you should use cushions and place your hand on it.
In the 29th chapter...
And now let's talk about the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
Then apply heat on their legs, to the area where the pain is located, to help the intestines in that area.
And when there is pain in the back of the hand, or in the fingers, they must be treated with a cautery.
And place the two splints on their legs for two days.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And when the disease is advanced, it affects the legs and feet, and requires attention.
And if the doctors are to be believed, they call it gout.
And similarly, in other parts of the body, the pain is caused by humors that are out of place.
Capitol .xxx.
This refers to the treatment of dislocations in the limbs, but for the spine.
Then apply the other treatments to the legs and feet, or they will die.
And if it is necessary to use a cushion, it should be placed so that it is both under their legs and also on the body of the patient as a remedy.
Therefore, it is called gout.
Gout cannot be cured by any other means but those involving bloodletting and treatment for excess humors.
Mays in the hands are often found to be a remedy for gout.
The pain in the legs will not be cured.
Then let them be treated by the physician so they don't extend beyond their own pain.
And if a doctor cauterizes the legs, he should place another on the chest.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs, and use another cushion to protect the body while applying the heat.
And to the head of the patient, you apply the other cushion to the knees.
And if the doctors are asked to burn the flesh, they will always say that it's a good idea to use the tool for the removal of their flesh to avoid the pain.
And if you wish to make treatment for pain in the legs or feet, you should use hot compresses on the affected areas.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, then take a cushion so you don't have to suffer from pain in the legs or feet. And if the patient's pain is caused by a cold humor that has accumulated in their limbs, then apply cauterization to the affected areas below the knee.
And if you wish, apply a cushion to the affected area; then place two cushions on their knees and another on their feet, leaving one hand free.
When there is a pain in the thighs, you should call for the physician.
A cushion must be placed on their pietz if there is a trauc in the legs to prevent pain.
Then place a cushion under the patient's body and have them hold their legs in a position that allows for the flow of blood to continue.
E aprop, then you should place a tourniquet on their leg.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and use another poultice to keep the patient from becoming cold, e.g., on their legs.
And if you apply a cautery to that part of the body which you have called [it] gout, then the blood will be drawn from the bowels, and another cushion will be placed on their legs.
If you are suffering from pain caused by excess fluids in the body, use medicines to reduce the inflammation for relief.
When your joints hurt, you might have some kind of injury to them, but if you're worried about something more serious, they might call for a doctor.
Of the many doctors who are called, only one should be chosen.
And treat them with a hot cautery.
The pain in the legs and feet of the patient is caused by their own body.
Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area, applying another cushion behind the knee for four days.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's joints, place a cushion on their legs, and put a cushion behind them.
Then the doctor will apply heat to the affected limb.
And if he makes points on their legs or feet, then put your hand on his chest to prevent him from making a further injury.
When there are pains in the foot, apply a cushion to their legs and make sure they don't move; the other leg should be placed on their knee.
And if a person suffers from a dislocation in the hip or has a cushion placed under them, you must put the cushion behind their back to prevent the dislocated hip from being further stretched.
May you reduce this ancient ailment by your own methods.
And if the injury is recent, you can use this method to treat them.
Then prepare an ointment for the patient's foot and apply it to the affected area.
And so the patient's legs are opened for a long time or the other way around.
And one should apply cushions to their body, keeping them suspended in the air.
This type of treatment is called cupping.
And when the dislocation is cured, then it is no longer necessary to treat it with a cushion.
When the patient's intestines are affected, it is called a hernia.
And if it is necessary to apply a hot poultice to the inflamed area and another poultice to the affected part.
This pain is caused by a specific ailment that requires special treatment for each part affected.
When gout occurs in the toes, it is treated by cauterization.
And let it be known that one intestine is for burning, another is for the other leg.
And if it is necessary, place two cushions on the sides of the body, one at the waist level.
And so they should apply a hot poultice to the affected part.
In the proper reduction, the patient's leg or arm should be held by an assistant, while another assistant holds the leg in place.
Then let two be used for the patient's legs, and two to make the incision on their feet, so that the pain in the joints does not spread to the other parts of the body; hold the patient's legs apart.
The patient must be treated for gout.
And if the dislocation is in the legs, lightly apply pressure to the knee caps on the front of the leg, as well as on the top of the foot, with the right hand.
E aprop es que la cushion should be placed on his face so that the other two (not necessarily cushions) are placed behind his head.
When joint pain occurs, it's important to apply a cushion to the affected area.
And so the patient's body should be treated with a cushion under the area where the pain is felt in the leg and another on the foot.
And compare the leg to the other leg.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, they are now ready for cauterization to be used on them.
And if you see that there is some swelling in the patient's body, place cushion on the intestine of the patient after it has been treated with a poultice.
Then apply a poultice to soothe the pain for several days.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to pain and inflammation in the joints.
And so the treatment of the intestine or leg pain begins.
The pain is caused by a lack of proper balance in the humors or vital fluids of the body.
The sign of a dislocated leg. You know what to do. You already have a cushion under their legs, so put another on their chest, and another will tell them what to do with the patient's pain.
Then place two cushions on its chest.
And if you want to treat the patient's leg with a cautery, but gently, so as not to cause more harm than good, place a cushion under their knee or ankle.
And if the patient's intestines are involved, place another cushion on their stomach to prevent the pain from spreading.
Let them use the cushion for a few days, then they will be able to walk around again with ease.
If a hot humor affects the legs, they are to be treated by burning or cauterization.
And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the body, they will apply leeches to the affected areas.
On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Then apply hot poultices to the affected area.
And that the patient's ankle is dislocated, so you must place it back in its proper position.
The cure for lightheadedness is to treat the ailment that causes it.
The translation for this text would depend on which language you are translating from.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the right side, place it on their left leg.
And if you apply a cushion to the leg, then the intestine or other parts will be left behind.
And if a physician applies cautery to the body, they must be careful.
And then you apply a hot cautery to the third part of the body, under their feet.
Therefore, if you return the intestine to its proper place, then use a pointed cautery to treat them.
Mays si a tu es prohibida means "If it is necessary to apply cautery" (the word "Mays" is a possible misspelling of "Maybe").
Then apply another cautery to the legs, so that the patient may be kept from moving his or her limbs.
And if a cushion is used to support them, the patient's pain will be on their legs.
And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the injury, it is by applying a poultice.
And so that you have to keep the patient from being too injured by the violent nerves.
Then leave it alone for two or three days.
And then place a cushion under their legs. Mays if the wound is in the front, then it is necessary to keep it open for easy access.
And if the patient has an outbreak of pus on their body, it should be treated with a poultice or embrocation in another place.
Chapter xxxiv.
The treatment for gout will be applied in this way.
Cove that the patient be given support to the affected limb; when the patient's leg is swollen, use cold compresses.
And if you are treating someone who has dislocations, use their own body weight to help reduce the dislocation.
Then place your hand on the patient's foot to keep it from swelling further.
And if the patient's body is affected by cold humors, apply a cushion to their legs, which will be placed on the table for three days; then you must ensure that the intestines are secured and protected from further harm.
This sentence appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in medieval southern France.
De dislocation caused by injury or other means, apply splints to the legs and use bandages on their limbs.
When the heat of the disease spreads to the intestines, then death will follow immediately.
A wise man should be consulted for medical treatment, not a mere guesser. Then apply a hot compress to the area, as needed.
The patient needs a cushion to cover their intestine and prevent gout, which is caused by excess humors in the feet.
And if a bone fracture occurs, you will apply your hand to the area where the pain is located.
And if you are to be a doctor, you must use your cushion to treat the patient. So many words have been written about the disease, but few know its true nature. Amen.
