"And if the book is in your hands, then you are already familiar with the subject of surgery through it."
And if the doctor has not been able to cure it completely, it should be treated as gout.
The patient has been placed on their back and their legs are elevated.
The text describes the knowledge and skills required of a surgeon in that era.
The text describes a medical procedure involving a patient and an attempt to use a cushion and another person's presence for comfort.
One must be careful, for many are the diseases that arise from its use in the world.
A doctor cauterized the inflamed area of a woman's neck, treating her for an illness.
When the other was placed on his chest, the man died on the third day.
And if the patient has a cushion in their foot, they are likely to die.
Here comes the first guess: And if the patient has a fracture in a limb, another doctor will apply a cushion to the area so the bone doesn't break through.
And so it's done for as long as the patient desires to have their thighs or ligaments touched, but only if they consent to the touch.
E a desliar la cushion on their chest, and they are applying another to their feet.
But when there is a need to address inflammation in the foot, it is called gout by doctors.
and then he would have you apply the cautery to their legs and feet.
And if the cause of illness is that which causes pain in the body, lahoras is a patient who suffers from gout.
And so it is necessary to give your patient, son, the proper care.
And now, to be sure, I have explained all the parts of this book that are relevant to your health.
And thus you must be prepared to face the pain in your own legs, and also to stand firm against it.
And let them use their knowledge to heal by God's grace, for the sake of their health and for the good of your name.
Another reason for applying bandages is to bind the body together, and another is to use a hot poultice on their legs. Do not be a doctor for your own health problems.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first chapter. This first sentence refers to the use of a cauterization tool (instrumentz) in treating an ailment.
This is the second part. The second chapter describes the use of cauterization for treating pain caused by excess fluids in the body.
The third chapter deals with the treatment of injuries to the legs in which a vein has been opened.
The patient must be treated with caution when using a cauterizer.
Therefore, I say that the treatment of which is by the first method.
And if you have to apply cautery to the entire body, then you should do so everywhere except their legs.
This text claims that Latin is a good remedy for hot and cold diseases.
If you are treating a disease that causes hot pain in the body, use cushions to protect the patient's hands from burning.
And that's how they open up the body when they need to be made.
Then apply to the body and its parts as needed, and put your hand on their back to help them, or to stop it from being too painful.
When applied to other parts of the body, it is customary for doctors to call them ailments.
And so the intestine or hernia to be cauterized, but not the bones.
The doctors call it a pain in the legs, difficult to cure, which is already at their feet.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body or apply them to the patient's legs because they are known for their expertise in treating the ailment.
And if it is necessary to treat them with a cautery, they should be treated with a cushion under their limbs.
And if there are cushions for the patient's legs, they should be applied to the affected area, even if they don't want them.
And if it is necessary to burn the affected area, it is called gout.
When the physician sees the intestine and other parts of the body are affected by humors, he will use medicine to treat them.
When one wants to treat the foot for illness, it is necessary to use a hot cautery.
A type of cautery can be used on the body to treat certain ailments.
E.g., "And if it is pain that is caused by you, use fire to burn the skin as needed."
This remedy is for the body; it is used in many diseases. And if there are other remedies for the ailment, they are used by the common folk but not by doctors.
E si diz que a gold cauterization is better than burning with a hot iron, but the latter should be done carefully, without causing harm to the body.
And so you will have to use your knowledge of medicine to treat the patient by treating their body with poultices to soothe the pain.
Then apply cautery moderately and gently to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to open the bowels, I have ordered the patient's body to be treated.
The first chapter.
And so they are often called by the name of the disease.
And the doctor will tell you what kind of medicine to use for the three or four days.
E aprop places the patient's feet on a cushion.
And then apply a cushion to their foot, which causes pain there. But you have to place your hand on their legs or cushion to prevent them from experiencing pain in the foot.
And so to his pain, which was caused by the cold, he applied a cushion to her legs.
E ayssi, if you are a skilled doctor, the patient must be placed in a comfortable position.
Then place a hot iron on the patient's feet for three days.
And then place your foot on that cushion to prevent further pain. Then apply the medicine within the wound to be cauterized by a physician.
And if the plague has affected the limbs, then apply treatment to the arms.
And if it is necessary to make an incision in the bone, they should be applied to the bone itself, while the patient's legs are held still.
And then place a cushion on their legs, and then cure them.
And other say that it's already gout when it has reached their legs and bones. And they say that the pain originates from the humors that have escaped.
Then prevent the disease from spreading further by treating it for a long time.
Mays ays a mi, e to do you may be docus in the patient's leg, but the other on lu; thus, the physician should use this method with caution.
And the first treatment is to save the patient from their suffering.
Chapter two.
Then apply the hot cautery to the head.
Et quando uno es de la causa del malaute, consider the patient's condition and apply the appropriate treatment for that specific cause. And then apply the burn on the patient's legs, et the cushion is placed where the intestines are. Incise the foot to drain the humors, and apply a cautery to the affected area. And if the patient's knees are hurting, you should also take care to avoid opening the vein on their foot that is affected by the cold.
Then apply the cautery to the area of the body where the pain is felt from the ailment that you call gout.
This chapter deals with gout.
This text in Latin would be translated as:  "And on cauterization, concerning ancient gout".
Then apply the appropriate remedies to the patient's legs depending on the type of pain, using a hot cautery or other methods.
Mays is a burning pain in the joints. Then apply a cautery to the affected area to cauterize the source of the pain.
Then return the patient’s body to its natural state, and you will have healed them in three days.
And then apply medicine to that spot to prevent further inflammation.
And if the patient has pain in their feet, apply heat with the cushion to alleviate it.
The patient's legs are treated by a doctor or surgeon who uses a specific method.
And if the patient's legs are affected by gout, apply cushions to support them while they are asleep.
And then gently place the cushion on the patient's body where their pain is located.
And if the quantity of blood in the legs is reduced, then you will have gout, which is the cause of pain in the joints.
Then place a cushion under the patient's legs.
And then you apply cautery to the affected area according to the old method.
Chapter four.
This refers to the treatment of gout.
When there are sharp pains in the thighs, we use the wound on the foot as an example to show the patient where they have it on their own body.
Empero, you must cauterize the intestine to prevent gout from spreading to other parts of the body.
This refers to someone being afraid because they don't know what caused the pain in their leg, so leave the operation alone for now.
And then apply the proper treatment for the ailment of blood flow to the legs.
And if you see that the patient's body can tolerate it, cauterize them, and place a cushion on their legs and a cautery on their feet.
And if you have already decided to do so, use a cauterizing tool on the legs, it's better to be safe than sorry.
When the pain is caused by cold humors, the pain is treated as gout.
On a specific treatment for the symptoms of gout, you can apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
When in the foot there are pains on their legs, another cushion is placed below the knees.
When there's a pain in the joints that affects the whole body, apply a point on the leg, and another on the feet. Alonga te am le cauter that are placed on the leg of the patient.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area and cleanse the wounds.
This is the text translated line by line:
A cushion should be placed under the patient's legs for support.
And you should cure it with a cautery used for making it hot, as long as it is not due to other causes than phlegm.
This is the way to prevent the intestine from coming out. (referring to the use of cushions in treatment)
When you have healed those in that area, it is customary to remove the first cushion and apply the cautery.
And if the pain is located on the leg, it is called a "pulling" or straining of the limb.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, place the cautery on the body part that should be treated.
The form of the treatment, known as cauterization, involves applying heat to the affected area. But even if you are called upon to treat a patient with gout, a condition that requires careful attention.
And apply the other to the area of the affected leg or foot, which if applied correctly, will heal the patient.
Chapter 7
This is about cauterization (the burning of flesh to treat illness).
And so if apoplexia is caused by ancient humors, it is said to be treated with four burns. And the way to treat it is done as has been mentioned above.
And on their legs, you should cauterize them if they need to be treated.
Chapter 8.
This refers to the application of a cautery (hot iron) on a part of the body affected by flacma, which is often used to describe gout in English.
The patient must be treated holistically with a focus on balancing their humors.
And if you have a wound in the head, it is treated as follows.
Then place cushions on them, for the intestines are to be treated with cauterization. And now place a cushion on their legs.
Then apply three cauteries to the patient's legs. And if the pain is in the toes, it is called gout.
Mays le metges must be used to denote the type of pain relief or treatment provided by doctors when dealing with a patient suffering from pain in the legs or feet.
Then apply the treatment to their legs and feet as needed.
The following text uses a mix of Latin-derived words and phrases, indicating that it's likely written in one of those languages.
And on their legs, they will place a cauterizing tool.
and if it is necessary to bring out the bad humors from under the skin, then he will cauterize them using the hot iron.
When your body is too full of the disease, it is necessary to cauterize the excess with another tool. And so the doctor applies a cushion to their legs.
Chapter 10
This refers to a treatment or procedure involving "cautery" for epilepsy.
This must be treated, not with a cushion under their arm, but rather with the use of a specific type of heat therapy.
Therefore, let us modify the brain's disease with the other treatments.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, apply these remedies for gout.
E que lahora el metge le tinguen les quals de la persona And if the patient has a fever, then they will be burned by the heat of the cushion.
And apply the cautery to the aforementioned patient's body.
If the patient is a child, the cautery should be used delicately.
Chapter 11
This is likely a treatise on the treatment of melancholia.
If a patient has melancholic humors that are corrupting their bowels, then use a cautery on the affected area.
If the cause of melancholy is due to an excess of humors, then it is caused by the brain being too hot.
And a poultice be applied to the affected area (head) and placed on the injured person's legs, which will heal them with proper care.
And if the pain is felt on the foot, it is gout.
And then apply a poultice to treat the pain in the legs; otherwise, they would be treated with a cushion. And if it is necessary to heat a part of the body, another cushion should be used on their legs. Then place a cushion on that part of the body which is already heated with gout.
Then the patient's foot has been treated by the surgeon, but they are not yet healed.
And then place your hand on their thigh to which they are holding the leg up.
The pain that affects the feet is called gout.
Another thing that causes pain in the bowels, they say, is the burning of the cauteries on the legs.
The doctor would also be called the commoner's answer to a question about the treatment of the knee.
And for that matter, let the patient have your hand on their legs for several days.
And if it's necessary to cauterize a patient who has a pain in their bowels, then apply it there.
When the veins and arteries are burned, the blood vessels are also cauterized.
And if you burn it (the foot) with hot iron, apply cauterization to it.
And he who holds knowledge in the hands of his intellect.
And some are burned in the foot by the illness of coldness.
The text is about the treatment of an ailment that affects the feet.
And if the patient has a fever, apply cooling compresses.
The first, second, and third lines translate to: And if you have to suffer from gout, use a hot cautery.
Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de nas e.g., another person's legs.
And if you do not get better after using three remedies, one should use another treatment for that which he has been treating with the hot or cold cautery. And then place another cushion on their legs, and apply heat to the affected area.
And guard that you do not burn that one.
And here is the way of the burning cautery.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
This one is tricky, but here's my best guess:
And if you want to treat these conditions, cauterize them on their legs, using two separate cauteries. And you have opened the space under the patient's knees, and if necessary, cauterize the body.
The first part of the text refers to the ancient medical practice of cauterization used for treating ailments caused by various factors.
Chapter 16.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's eyelids if they have already been diagnosed by the doctor.
When there are other things that can cause pain in the legs besides gout.
If you have treated the patient's body with cautery, consider those on their legs, as well as the intestine.
And so the patient is treated for gout when they have a leaf of pain in their legs, and another plant on their feet.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's thighs.
And then put on the patient a cushion, which is what they used to do for the treatment of the area.
Then apply another cauterization to the patient's body.
And if you see that the patient's skin is already inflamed, apply a cushion to their legs.
And so raise your leg and let the pain be felt by the hands? And if you want to cure that which you have already opened up, apply the cushion.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area, but be careful that your cushion does not slip.
If your hand comes out in pain, they should be treated by doctors for their condition.
And so it should be known, to treat such pain, the use of a cautery on the legs is called for.
And you have already placed your cushion on their legs, but if you need to make them be on their thighs, then do so.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body.
Therefore, if the pain is felt in the feet, it is called gout.
Then place a cushion on the patient's abdomen to prevent them from experiencing pain in their legs and feet.
Gathered around the patient's foot are the tools needed for healing at the beginning, and those who are being treated should be treated carefully.
And this is the way to burn the leaves of the myrtle tree in their entirety.
And so the severity of gout varies according to the size and location of the body, e.g., the size of the swelling or inflammation on the foot.
E no sira le dolor de los metges, but they will use it for another patient's ailment.
Another cushion should be placed on the legs, and another on the feet, which is used for gout or other ailments.
E si no has been mentioned in English as a way to describe the location of their pain.
When you treat a fistula, you must do so carefully to avoid causing pain to the patient.
And then place a cushion under them, and another on their legs for the patient's comfort.
And you've already placed your hands on their legs, but there should be a proper explanation for the use of this tool:
The other was treated as if by the poultice.
And if you wish, place a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent the pain from spreading. And if you wish, let the patient be treated accordingly.
However, it is better to be done with the patient's ailment.
Then use a hot iron on the thighs, if they are open, and dry it. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
At the beginning of the treatment, place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
This is about a patient who has been experiencing pain in their legs and needs treatment.
This refers to the use of a lead cautery for a fistula, but was likely used in a now-outdated medical practice, so this is likely about treating an infection.
Then apply a poultice if the doctors have already said to do so for the fistula in the patient's body, and on the foot, and put your hand on their hand, which has been placed upon the affected area.
Capitol .xviii.  would be translated as Chapter 18.
And if it is necessary to burn the burn on the legs of the patient, cauterize the wound.
Inflammation in the gums, particularly common in children.
And if one has to apply a cupping glass on the legs, it should be done in this way when pain arises.
The patient's body is now being affected by the severity of their condition.
And if there is a need to bleed them, it is said to be gout.
And place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Capitol .xix. is chapter 19.
This refers to treating fistulas, which are abnormal connections between organs or tissues.
And in the case of a burn in the mouth or throat, apply a poultice to the affected area and use a cautery to stop the bleeding.
And thus if the patient's body has been opened, one must be careful to treat the affected part.
The English translation provided for the original text is incorrect; it should be translated as "Chapter 20".
This sentence refers to the use of dental tools for cauterization and softening of the tonsils, respectively.
When the joints are inflamed by humors, apply the cushion directly to the area, but be careful not to overdo it.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop pose el seu intestine on its cavity, et autre.
E la persona que ha suffered from the pain of the leg, et another one to the body by placing their hand on it.
Chapter .xxi.
This likely refers to a practice of treating tooth pain using cauterization.
When tooth pain is due to cold, you should use a hot compress or apply heat using a branding iron.
This is a Latin-style translation: "And (if) you burn the patient's body with a hot iron, it is called gout, and is treated by applying points to the affected areas."
And if you need to make an incision on the surface of the foot, apply cautery to prevent the blood vessels from bleeding.
When a tooth is hurting, place a tool on the affected area to apply pressure and keep the pain there.
Then, however, if the heat has spread to the foot, then use fire cauterization sparingly.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's leg so that the pain will be relieved.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's affected area for one hour, applying it carefully.
And if it is necessary to make points on the patient's legs, it is done by using it as a cauterizer.
And this is the way to use a cauterizer.
A hot poker was used to treat the patient's pain.
On the treatment of gout.
When the patient has an illness that causes pain because of humors in the body, treat them by applying a poultice to the affected area and using herbs to treat them.
And if the abscess is small, use a hot cautery on the area for three days.
And then apply that same ointment to the affected area.
The patient's hand should be placed on their knee while the bloodletting is done.
And apply a cushion to their legs, and another to their feet.
Then you have already opened the patient's intestine up to the knee, so that the patient's body will be able to remove the cushion and then put your hand on the knee.
Then apply it to the patient's throat or other parts of the body, but gently, and cauterize only slightly.
And cauterize their other legs. And then apply the cautery to the area where you have placed your hand on the patient's clavicle.
Then apply your hand to that area of the patient's leg.
Of the twenty-fourth chapter.
This refers to the treatment of disease in the lungs and coughing.
Then apply hot compresses to the patient's legs in order to reduce inflammation, as the ancient practice has been for them.
And if you wish, let the patient be treated with a cauterization on their ears, for this is what they are called.
E siat a lesi còps.
And the cautery should be made at the place where the pain is located.
Chapter 25.
And hold the other leg of the patient down there on the cushion.
And if the patient has a fever, then the doctor will use a cautery to treat them.
And this is the form of the treatment when using a cautery with two points, or other treatments for inflammation in the area.
And if you have to cauterize the other side, then apply the cautery to the opposite leg.
At times it is called gout when there is pain in the feet and ankles.
Then apply heat to the affected area to soothe the pain.
And if the pain is caused by the infiltration of cold humors, then cauterization on their muscle should be used.
E aprop reduce la cosa on the other side or his chest, because they are being affected by an uncharacteristic pain
This refers to the stomach.
Then use a cushion to support their legs and place your hand on the area where the pain is felt, but be careful not to press too hard, lest you cause more pain by pressing on the nerves.
And adjust the amount of heat in the cautery to the appropriate level.
And here comes the device for applying the cautery according to this method, which also applies to the patient's stomach in this case.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, you should use a needle to burn the belly, for that is what is meant by the word "cauterizat" in this context means to treat with a hot iron or similar instrument.
Then apply the appropriate cautery on the patient's body.
Then apply a cushion to their legs.
When there is pain in the belly, you should apply a cushion to their knee.
And if a man has a pain in the place between his legs, he will be called upon to apply cauterization.
And do not let your mind be troubled by the use of these methods.
And if the pain is on the legs, they are already filled with cushions.
And if it is possible, avoid making cuts/punctures on their legs to prevent them from being exposed to cold humors.
And so that you may know, if you wish to treat someone with too much cauterization, they will get hot feet.
This looks like a Latin phrase from a medical text.
This is the translation you provided for "When doctors are looking for the cause of pain in the feet, they say it is from the cold humors: "The cushion"
The pain of the condition known as gout is felt most strongly in the feet.
And if it's in the tunic, they are (the doctors) very skilled at handling gout.
Then one may try to apply heat to the affected area; and if the patient complains of pain in their legs, they may be suffering from a condition that causes pain due to the cold humors affecting the joints. And cauterize the affected area so that the patient's body can heal.
And if their legs are affected by other humors, and it's necessary to treat them.
And if a patient has a disease, it's better to avoid using cautery on them.
Chapter 29.
When using the provided context, the translation would be: **On their condition.**
This means:
Then apply a heated tool to the affected area, but avoid direct contact with the bone near the joint.
The patient will be healed by the cushion in their legs, if they are allowed to do so.
This is how doctors in the past would describe treating gout by cauterizing the affected area.
Then if you have an opening in the foot, the place will be healed.
Capitol .xxx. translated to English is Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the heart.
When you cure a disease in the legs, it is customary to mention the type of cautery used for the treatment.
Therefore, the patient must be treated as if they had a fever in their legs, or by some other means for less severe cases.
And if it is necessary to make a cautery on your leg, then use a cushion for the purpose.
And if you were to cauterize the intestine, it is best to use the following method: ...
And so that the surgeon may apply the correct length of the cautery to their body, they use another cushion for the patient's body.
Then return the patient's body to its natural position.
And thus the patient has four points.
And if you want, apply a cautery to the area where there is pain, and use a cushion to support them, and have another person help with their other leg.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs and feet.
Of the 380 possible words in the text, it appears you have provided three translations (the second line you provide) rather than one sentence.
E si la persona has been opened for some time, and their condition requires it, they are treated by cauterizing the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the affected joint only.
The above sentence is a mix of Latin-based words and Italian/Spanish words, which makes it difficult to determine without knowing which language it's primarily written in. And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the leg, then heat should be used on the legs.
And apply a poultice to the affected area.
If the patient has gout, they should be treated with a cushion under their bowels and another person assisting them.
Then the patient's foot must be cauterized.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to pain in the feet.
Then apply a hot iron to the foot and its surrounding area to prevent further damage.
When the blood is full of the humor that causes pain, it is the worst type of gout.
Then if it is necessary to make points on the intestines of a man, they should be applied below the knee. The patient's intestines are inflamed and swollen from the cold humors: apply cautery to the affected area.
And you have already treated them for a long time, but they are still suffering from it.
Aprofitejam el dolor de la patient's knees in their legs.
And if it is necessary to make cuts on the foot, do so carefully.
This refers to a burning tool used in medical procedures.
Gently apply heat to the stomach and legs to treat the intestines for the ailment that causes them to be called gout in the context of humoral medicine.
And if you encounter a patient suffering from gout, place a cushion under them, and apply cauterization to their abdomen and legs, but avoid applying it directly to the stomach, lest you cause further injury.
Then apply the poultice to the affected area on the feet.
Therefore, you should apply the cushion to their legs.
Then apply a hot iron to the area of the body where the intestines were affected by a thick humor.
If the stomach is cold, you will be able to tell if it is chilled by the food that has been consumed.
This text refers to a specific chapter (Chapter 35) but seems to be describing instructions for treating gout with cauterization using a hot iron.
And if a firebrand is used on the patient's thighs, they are healed by another treatment.
When you apply a poultice to the body, use another cushion to protect the patient's skin from the heat. Then apply a cautery to the foot, while another hand holds the patient's legs and you prevent pain by applying pressure.
And if the patient has gout, make sure to apply the treatment carefully.
You have already treated the patient's body with cautery on their head, and you put a cushion under them while they are being cauterized on their feet.
The text appears to be referring to a specific passage in a treatise.
And then apply a cautery to the affected area.
When nature has not been successful in returning the intestine to its proper place, the patient will be treated by the physician.
And thus when humors are corrupted, they cause a disease called fistula which was the case in this one.
And then apply the hot cautery to the joint. Then put a cushion under that very patient's body to prevent the inflammation from spreading through the fistula.
And they use a cautery on the legs when necessary.
When the pain is in the bladder or intestines, treat it with a poultice on the affected area, but avoid using a poultice unless absolutely necessary.
And if it is necessary to apply your hand to the affected area for healing, use this method on them, but only with the cushions.
When the patient is placed in a stable position.
And if there are no other remedies for pain in the joints, then try to relieve the pain with cushions placed on the legs.
This sentence appears to be in English but contains archaic terms and grammar.
This is a description of the treatment of gout.
When there are painful swellings on the body, and you have to treat them directly, then use a cushion.
And so you see, your translation is correct!  It is customary to use three cauterization points for this ailment.
Capitol 38.
And then cauterize the bladder properly.
Then apply cold to the urine to stop it from being inflamed.
Burn that which causes pain in the legs, with a hot iron if necessary.
And so he placed a cushion above the patient's head.
E si es ja e'l  dolor de les quals les arises are caused by the same thing.
And so, the treatment involves using a heated cautery on the affected joint.
Then the use of hot irons to treat his or her ailment should be used; otherwise, the patient's body will be injured by the heat.
When the pain is in the joints due to the humors, it is called gout.
On the subject of dislocation of the hip.
When there are signs of gout, caused by an imbalance in humors, apply cauterization to the affected area. And the patient is to be burned on the legs with a cautery.
Then there is a pain in the left side of the body because the place where the pain is located on the leg is being touched by the cautery.
And if the pain is severe, apply a cautery to the other foot.
If a patient has a pain in their foot, then they should be treated with cautery.
And if a burn occurs on the foot, it is treated by cauterizing the affected area.
Chapter xli.
This refers to cauterizing (burning) the vein near the knee (located behind the kneecap) to treat gout.
A physician should treat that which causes pain in the patient's legs by applying a cushion to their leg.
The manner of treatment for the afflicted ailment is described in two ways: with medicine or with fire.
Let me know if you want to apply hot cauterization to the patient's foot. When it comes to treating the body by applying points, it's important to remember the specific needs of each patient when placing them.
May some hot compresses be applied to the patient's leg.
And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the area where the bone was dislocated.
And this is the way to treat a pain in the legs by applying a hot cautery.
The text mentions four sources: a cushion on the legs, a cushion on the foot, and your hand on the foot. This suggests a medical practice where the patient's leg is treated with a hot iron or other method to draw out the excess humor. Please provide more context for better understanding.
And if the physician applies a burning cautery to their body, they should proceed carefully according to the patient's condition.
And then apply the cautery to the area between the legs and feet, if necessary.
The patient has a cushion under their legs, and they are applying a knife-like cautery to them.
And if they need to be treated with cautery, make sure to apply the cushion while treating the nerves and arteries.
E you have already seen one or another of those who apply cauterization, and you have put a cushion on their legs, and heated them up. And then apply a cold cautery to their abdomen.
And if there is a need to treat pain in two places on the body, use a hot cautery on each leg.
When there is an excess of humors in the body, doctors say it is called gout.
And you have already placed three cushions; one on the patient’s chest, and two on the legs; and some say that's three parts for a gout attack.
This line describes a medical procedure involving the use of fire to treat pain in the legs and feet. Then place three cauterizations on them.
Then leave him to lie there for three days, cauterize the affected area for as long as needed, so the patient may be healed.
This is the first line of the translation of a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles Latin, but likely has some elements of Arabic or another language mixed in.
And when you are treating gout, place a cushion under their legs.
Mays cauteri are medicines applied to the feet; they will have their pain treated by you if you apply them correctly.
Then apply a cautery to the area between their legs; et siat as if the patient were a cushion.
And if a burning pain arises in the legs of the patient, hold their limb for one hour, and apply your hand to the affected area.
Then apply the cushion to their leg to relieve the pain.
And if it is necessary to apply it for three days, then place a cushion under their feet, and they will be fine after that.
And then they apply a cushion to the affected area, which could be the foot.
And if the pain is in the leg or foot, apply cold compresses as necessary.
Here you have to place the cushion in such a way that the patient's hands are held, and the hot water bottle should be used to prevent the intestine from becoming too inflamed. When the treatment plan involves applying pressure to specific points on the body, it's best to consult a physician.
This sentence is translated from Spanish to English:
And hold it there, applying a poultice to the affected area, and if necessary, use a heated tool to cauterize other parts of the body, such as the feet, where appropriate.
Then apply cautery to their legs and apply it to the feet.
Then, if the patient has been treated with the cautery, the pain will be healed by applying heat to the affected area.
And so, for it to be considered a true "gra" (humor) related pain, the patient must have a cushion placed under their feet, the affected area should be treated with a hot iron, and another cushion should be placed on their legs.
And if the patient has been suffering for three hours, he should be left alone after the treatment.
And if there are cold humors in the body, and the patient's legs are affected, apply a bandage to prevent further swelling.
Then, they should know that the patient's hands should be covered during treatment.
When pain occurs in the legs, apply cautery as described by the physician's method for treating a fenda, place a cushion under their knees.
Then apply charcoal to the patient's wound after opening it up for the treatment of wounds. And if you see that the pain extends to another part of the body, apply other remedies.
And this method of cautery is called cauterization by fire.
When pain in the foot is caused by cold humors, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
Of cauterization.
Some people experience pain in their intestines due to causes such as cold or other causes, such as from an excess of fluids in the body.
And then the cautery is used only for that specific ailment.
And if it is customarily to do so in the case of a cold humors-related ailment, they are placed on the patient's legs and feet.
And there you have cushion-related burns on the feet.
When you have treated them, place three or four hot irons on their legs in the following way.
Chapter 43.
From cauterization, their body will be cleansed by removing unhealthy humors.
This ailment affects the feet of small children.
And apply a hot iron to the affected joint(s) to alleviate the pain.
And so when you apply a cautery to the legs on a cushion, that's how you treat a person suffering from a condition similar to gout, but don't let them have pain in their feet. Then the fire of the pain is felt in all parts of the body, as the patient experiences it.
And if you wish, cauterize the spine with two or three lines. Then apply heat to the affected areas to treat them.
Then apply a poultice to that place.
And then apply the hot cautery to the affected area for as long as necessary.
Chapter xliv.
This refers to the treatment of pain in the joints and legs.
And if there's a pain in the feet or legs, it is likely to be a condition treatable by gout treatments.
And therefore when the gout is cured, they will use the other methods to prevent it from returning.
And if you need to cauterize anything, use a cautery for that.
Gently apply heat to the affected area to help alleviate pain caused by cold humors.
Then apply the point to the affected limb. And if there are pains in the joints or in the legs, you must apply the cautery to them on each one of their sides.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the body, I will apply it with a hot cautery, but lightly, so as not to damage the skin.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the bowels.
Then return to the patient's body and apply cauterization if necessary.
Then you have to puncture it with a needle, and another one on your hand.
Then apply the point on the legs to the patient's body parts.
When lepers are treated with proper medicine and care, the skin is healed by this method.
This is Latin for "Chapter 45" (or possibly "Chapter XLV").
On the subject of ruptures (on the legs).
And for those who have a problem with the intestines or stomach, it is because of the cushion of the body, which is the area that you have already mentioned.
And if you are seeing a patient, and they have an intestine on their legs, you should apply heat.
And if a wound appears on your body, apply a bandage to the wound to prevent the spread of infection.
And place the cushion on the legs to make them warm.
You are already experiencing pain in your legs and feet. Then apply a cushion to the legs or abdomen, depending on the location of the pain, but carefully avoid further complications by keeping your hand on the hernia during treatment.
When the pain is in the feet, you should apply heat to the affected area.
And then place the cautery on the cushion you have already used for another purpose.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's body where there is no pain.
When you are treating someone for a condition involving an excess of cold humors, you must treat the whole body.
And if it is necessary to make incisions, then it is customary for the patient's feet to be cushioned during such procedures.
E apro you have to apply heat to the area for three days.
And if the patient has another illness, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if there are other ailments upon them, they may be treated by applying something to their ailment area.
And when you put your hand on their leg, it is called a "cushion" to protect the patient from pain.
And if you have to apply cautery to their bowels, be careful and do so correctly, for the patient's health.
And you have to apply a different treatment for the pain in their feet, so that the pain subsides.
And so I will tell you how to cauterize the ruptures in other parts of the body; the patient's body must be cauterized with a red-hot iron, but the severity of the pain should be taken into account.
And if it is necessary to treat someone's leg or foot pain, apply cauterization to the affected area.
And place a cushion on their legs, so that they are not too heavy for the patient's feet.
This is a tricky one!
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area for healing.
And for each limb, the doctor examines its size and determines the appropriate treatment.
And if the pain doesn't subside after using the cauteri on the affected area, repeat the application to the affected limb.
The chapter on how to treat a patient with gout.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's body.
Then you must treat leprosy by applying a cushion to the affected area.
Then you must cauterize the affected area with a hot iron, ensuring that the cautery does not touch the skin.
And if the patient has a pain that causes them to have difficulty walking, you will make them walk so that they can be healed by cauterization.
And if you have already found leprosy in the body, cauterize it on the head and on each limb, from the feet to the hand, and apply a cushion to the area of the limbs.
And if you wish to prevent burning those tissues, do not apply heat there.
E alcunas others apply heat to the patient's feet, and apply a hot cautery to their knees, or to the area around their belly.
And if you have to use other tools for healing, it is important to know that it causes pain in their legs because they are being cauterized, which is why it says so by another name.
And if there are few burns, they are small and insignificant.
And apply the other poultice to the patient's feet.
Chapter 48.
Then apply the cautery to your body and you will see which part of the leg.
Then you cauterize the affected area according to its need for treatment.
This is a bit tricky as this text uses a combination of languages, but here's my best guess: "And if they have a burn on their leg, one will be burned by the pain." And thus you have applied the remedy to the affected area, with ointment.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, or the feet, they should be treated with a cautery instrument, but not burned with one.
This is the first time I've seen such poetic Latin!
Another translation for the last phrase could be: "And if it's necessary to cauterize the affected area, the patient will need to hold their foot still during the procedure.
And apply cautery to the patient's thighs, so they may be treated by it.
Then apply the medicine to the area around the ankle.
And if there's pain in the legs, apply a cautery to the leg, or a poultice of rosemary and other herbs.
Capitol .l. should be treated as a separate sentence.
When there are signs of illness on the legs or feet, the physician should apply cautery to them.
And if the cancer is starting, you should cauterize it immediately.
The first few lines are just examples, but this is what I think the translation of the provided sentence could be:
And if it's necessary to burn their feet, it is customary to use a hot iron, which is why it's called gout.
Chapter 51.
And if you are using a cautery, it is for burning away the pain in the legs.
When the pain in the legs has been present for a long time, it is customary to call it "crude" by saying that the patient is ill with a painful disease.
Then place a cushion on the body if you wish to cauterize the legs, but do not cauterize the patient while they are asleep.
E alleviat: When you apply cautery to the affected area, it can relieve the pain; if the condition is curable by cauterization, it is called a healthy body part.
Chapter 52.
And then apply cautery to the corroded areas.
You are experiencing corrosion, which eats away at you.
Therefore, when cauterizing a patient's body, apply the cautery to their foot for a short time.
Then apply cautery to eradicate all of the humors from all parts of the body.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area and let it be treated by the patient's own body for three days.
And apply your treatment to that part of the body which requires it.
Then apply cautery to the area where the patient's health is not good.
And the cushion is applied to their legs, as they are in pain. Therefore, if you are using fire to treat an ailment, it is a light matter.
And therefore the patient's illness requires that you use the acute treatment for the gout.
Of gout in the joints, which are caused by cold humors, the author says it is a condition that affects the joints.
This refers to the application of a cautery device to treat an ailment.
Then put your hand on the patient's foot.
You have already heated the patient's body with a hot cautery, so now you should place a cushion on their legs to prevent the infection from spreading down to the lower parts of the body, and apply a bandage.  (This is a more literal translation, as it seems "with" refers to something different in this context.)
Then apply a hot iron to the area around the knee, where there was pain, and cauterize them. And that should be left for three days so that their arm may be treated. Then apply a poultice to the affected area for one night, as it is customary to treat gout in the legs with a warm poultice.
And then apply the poultice to the location to promote healing.
And when there is no conversion to be made, you should apply hot cautery.
And then burn the other person's foot to prevent pain from spreading.
And they have already opened the space on the legs so that the pus from the humors is drained.
The text mentions cushions being placed on the legs, so the translation is likely related to the body's response to illness or pain.
The use of hot irons on the body is dangerous, so avoid doing that.
Then you should apply the hot cautery to the affected area, or place something else on the nerves to prevent them from feeling pain.
And if the illness is severe, they must be treated with caution to avoid further harm.
This is the 50th chapter.
Then he should apply his hand to the affected area to keep the inflammation from spreading.
The patient should be given a cushion for comfort if they have a fistula.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area, but don't use the hottest setting, keep it mild.
And perhaps even a cushion should be used for bloodletting.
Capitol lvi. (This appears to be a chapter heading or title.)
The patient has a burning desire to leave the confines of their hospital bed and go home.
And if it is necessary to apply the cushion to the patient's leg, it is called an arrow shot.
A hot cautery is used to treat the pain in the foot, and a hot cautery is used on the affected leg.
Then place a cushion on their legs, and apply another on their chest, so that they may feel less pain.
And then place a poultice or cushion on their feet.
Then if you apply heat to the area, there is no need for other tools.
Then keep the patient safe from harm while they are being treated.
E sapias que le patient’s body was in pain, then apply a poultice to the affected area, and if necessary, cauterize them, but only with proper care and knowledge.
And if it is necessary to use stricture, then the patient should be treated by applying a cushion.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area to prevent the pain from returning.
Then return the patient's legs to their place, and apply the other remedies.
Then place a hot iron on the foot to apply cautery.
Then we will discuss the treatment for those who wish to know about it in this chapter.
Then learn what you will about the application of cauterization in the previous chapter.
This must be a careful instruction on how to treat a wound. And apply a cushion on the legs of them, and let them be accompanied by fear and tremor.
And if you are a physician, take care that your name is not cursed by the patient's foot for those who suffer from gout. When there's pain in the legs from the feet, you should know that humors are often blamed for causing it.
And placed upon their legs (or feet?) are for the sake of that which is in the cavity.
Aprop consent to be careful and attentive to the patient's needs; do not give in to greed and lust for wealth.
And place your hand on the patient for healing, while using the cushion to support their leg and the other methods for their health.
And if you are the son of God, he who has no cushion, you will be given his own weight and measure.
And if you are treating a case of a disease that affects the intestine or other joints, you can use cauterization to treat the pain.
Chapter one.
And if it is necessary to cure diseases that are caused by humors in the cavity of children's legs
When the child is ill, we must know if it is the kind that affects the joints.
When pain caused by cold humors affects other parts of the body too, it is called gout.
And if I am to be called upon for treatment, I can only be seen as having a medical role when someone is suffering from a condition in the area of their body where the disease first manifests, and another cushion is placed under them.
And if you have already treated the child's head with a poultice.
This sentence describes how to position someone for treatment with a cauterizer.
The English translation is: And if there is pain in the foot, it is good to put a cushion under their knee, and another on their legs, and another on the leg and the body will be treated with a cushion.
And so if the humors are more inflamed, and the abscess is larger, it is called gout.
And so the doctors would treat the condition by applying heat to the affected areas and the patient's own body temperature was not enough to cure it. And if you want to treat them with a cautery on the legs, you must do so carefully:
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, you should use it on the legs, and another to the chest, which is how to make sure that the plaguing disease is gone.
That's a tricky one! It seems to be describing how to treat an ailment that causes swelling in the head.
This is a good sign for the patient.
The second chapter follows.
When applied to the foot or legs, it is that the pain is caused by an imbalance of humors, so if the physician applies heat to the affected area, they should also use a bandage to cover the area and prevent the pain from spreading.
When the blood vessels are constricted, they are called gout.
And you place your hands on the legs of the patient to prevent pain from infiltrating.
And if you wish, apply a poultice to the affected area to keep it warm and protected from further infiltration.
And if a patient's foot is swollen, you should put small cushions on them, so they are comfortable.
And if the pain does not subside, place a small amount of hot water on their legs.
And if the patient's blood be hot and inflamed, it is called by doctors the gout.
And another thing to consider is if the patient has a disease of the plague or any other cause of the disease on their legs.
And so treat the plague by placing cushions on their limbs.
E if you are a doctor, and so forth.
This means if someone has an ailment in their temples that causes pain, then you should apply cautery to the area between the thighs (a location used for treating ailments by drawing out fluids), and place a cushion on their legs.
When the pain is in the feet, and they are treated by the methods known to medicine, the patient must be given relief from their pain.
The method for treating pain in the body by applying hot cautery to the temples is shown in the following instructions:
And if the patient has a condition that causes pain in the legs to be treated by cauterization, it should be done with a cushion, or another method using coarse cloth, as the heat from the fire is used to treat the other ailments. And if it is necessary to open his legs, he must be given a poultice and rest them. This refers to applying treatments to the affected area of the body, likely the feet, by using a cautery tool.
And if you want to open up the body or close it for gout, apply the cautery above the affected area.
And when it is necessary to evacuate the blood from their veins, and then they are three days old.
And if the pain is severe, place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent the spread of the disease.
And apply cauterization to remove excess humors from the body; and do not let the pain spread further.
If you want, apply that cauterize the foot, and use a cushion for the other parts.
If you are a doctor treating a patient with fever or pain in the limbs, you should know what to do.
And if it is necessary to make a cautery mark on a patient, after they have been properly treated with a hot poultice for their ailment, then apply the hot iron as needed.
Then apply a cautery to the legs or on the chest. And if there are no present reasons for that, the patient should be warmed up.
And if the patient has two ulcers, you use a hot iron to apply it to the two places where they are.
This is the way to use a cautery on the leg and foot.
And place a cushion on the ribs (or between the ribs) so that the patient does not suffer from the cold humors. But if the patient’s body has been infiltrated by a cushion, let them be healed.
Therefore, when there is gout in one's feet, they are to be treated with heat and light pressure.
And this work is best done with a light cautery.
Then if the body is swollen in the area between the thighs, put a cushion under them to prevent the swelling from getting worse.
Chapter four.
And if doctors are called upon to treat acute gout, they use cushions and apply heat.
And if the patient has a fever, this is a sign that the body is ready for a medical procedure involving those specific veins.
E tu ja has ubert in the middle of the leg, e aprop le de la les cuales are in the same place as the other three. And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the legs or feet, you should use the following instructions: place a cushion under them.
And keep your hand on the leg where the pain is felt in both the lower and upper parts. And if the patient's illness is caused by humors that have been affected, or by an injury, three fingers should be used.
And if you want to dry up the humors in a subject's body, use a cushion.
You have already treated the patient's thighs with cushions. This is the beginning of the second part. Excise that part of the intestine below the second incision. And then place the intestines or hernia back in place with a blunt instrument for the sharp one to be used by the doctor and another instrument for the other.
Another way to say "gout" would be a pain in the body caused by this.
This means that a doctor should carefully place their hands on the patient when applying treatment to a case of gout.
Another person should apply pressure to the patient's legs while they are lying down on a cushion.
Then return the patient's body to the cushion, and apply an ointment to prevent the pain from spreading.
And on the third day, apply a poultice to the affected area and use a hot cautery for other ailments.
Chapter 5.
> This refers to applying a cushion to the patient's legs, suggesting they are treating something related to the lungs or chest.
When joint pain is caused by a strong and continuous flow of humors, it is considered gout.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's mouth, making sure to open the area around the temples for such a treatment.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth. Place a cushion under their legs to prevent the infection from spreading.
Then, when the swelling in the patient's leg subsides, apply a poultice to the area.
Then, apply heat to the legs, but apply it carefully to avoid harming the intestine or worsening the condition of the herniated part.
This is about the use of a cautery by doctors to treat a condition in the legs.
So there are four causes of pain in the legs, such as a stone that is sharp or similar to stones like gravel and causes pain in the area of the foot, it's called ayssi.
And if you see that the patient's legs are swollen or in pain, then apply a cushion to them. And if a patient has a hernia or other conditions that cause pain in their legs and feet, they are to be treated by cauterization.
Then if it is not caused by cold humors, they know how to use a special instrument for extraction.
It's necessary to open the joint by applying heat.
And if it is not caused by the doctor's own hand, then the patient has a cushion placed under them and another on their legs to hold them in place. E aprop extratte the cushion so that you may apply other cushions to the patient's legs in their own time.
Then, one must be careful to avoid pain when using cautery on their legs. And you should put a cushion under them, the patient, and dry their ears.
This is a trick question! This sentence describes applying a cautery to a part of the body, but the next sentence is about treating a problem with the intestines. The text suggests using a poultice for pain in the feet, which is unlikely to be related to the "all-body" context.
Then apply the lancet to the foot in accordance with the nature of their illness. Then if it's necessary to treat a patient for a condition, use tools suitable for the ailment.
And when a cushion has been placed on their legs to treat them, then apply a poultice on the foot where the problem lies. And administer to the affected area a cautery, which should be applied after they have been given other treatments.
And if you are thinking of placing a cushion under their legs, you must use your hands to move them.
And in this way you have to take a look at the foot and apply a cushion if necessary; otherwise, treat the patient with the usual remedies for the condition. And so that they may be treated with a hot cautery.
And so that they may be treated with a hot cautery. The patient's pain is located in their legs.
And so that the bloodletting of the patient be as painless as possible, I have already applied a bandage to the affected area.
Thus, even if a person's feet are affected by illness, it is customary to call it gout.
And if you are treating the ailment already mentioned in the extraction of the stone, it is to be called gout.
And if there are any signs that the disease is caused by worms, take them away with a cautery or a knife. And if you wish to cauterize any part of the body; then you should use a hot iron in that case.
Mays you will find in the circuit of the patient's body, apply heat to the abdomen; they should be applied by an expert, as needed.
And apply medicine to the area with your hands. And if you have opened their thigh, place a cushion on their leg.
And so if it becomes necessary to use a cautery, put it on the body part where they are needed. And if you want to apply a poultice to a patient with gout, use a cushion to hold the poultice in place.
And when it is necessary to treat with a hot cautery, apply it with a small one. And if it is too much for the patient to hold, open the bowels and release the pain.
Chapter 7
And when cauterizing the legs, apply the treatment to the ears.
Then apply a cauterizing instrument to the stomach area, if necessary, and call it a "pain in the belly" when applied to the abdomen, but don't apply it directly to the skin where it might cause a burn.
And if the patient's body cannot be made to apply their own hands to the treatment, they must have someone else do it for them.
When you see your own body part. And so if you see the symptoms, treat it accordingly.
And if it is necessary to use a cushion on the patient, apply it to the legs which are in pain.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's body if needed, place it in the area where the pain is located.
Then apply a hot cautery to the patient's spine and another to their legs.
And if you feel numbness or tingling in your limbs, apply heat to the affected area to make it less painful.
And if you wish to make a poultice on the leg, use a poultice made from cold herbs.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
Chapter 8.
And so that the eye-inflammation be healed.
And when there is a need to make an incision into the veins of a patient, the physician should apply a cauterization method that does not damage them.
Then he places his hand over the patient's stomach, and puts the hot iron on the affected area.
When the pain in your legs subsides, use a cushion to support them.
When the patient's illness is caused by something, they are treated with cauterization.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and slightly to French as well.
Then apply a cushion to the eyes of the patient.
The patient's illness is a result of some underlying condition.
You have already opened the space between the legs for the body's fluids.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's legs, then they should be treated with a cautery applied to their eyelids, which are affected by the ailment;
Therefore, if you need to make an incision (a "fissure") on the leg, it should be done with care.
And if the swelling is large, apply a bandage to the thigh, and you can use a poultice for the rest of the body, and a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if a little [of the ailment] does not come back, it is said that they are cured.
And if you have opened the intestine to treat it, then put it back into the cavity.
Then, if necessary, apply a warm, saline compress to the area.
Chapter 10
This is the cure for other parts of the body, such as if you put a cushion under them.
Treat them for their ailment and treat the eye with a hot compress.
And if you want to know what kind of pain they are experiencing, and where the patient is sleeping, it's important to see if it is in the legs, or if there is a fear that the illness might spread to their eyes.
And if the patient's body has been affected by imbalanced humors in the limbs, it is necessary to use a cautery for that, but a cushion should be placed under the area.
And if you are called upon to perform an operation on the patient's body, it is customary to be called "May" by the doctors.
And if you are treating a pain in the legs, extract the cushion from beneath the patient's feet.
And see to it that you do not apply your hand on their legs, for they are about to be seized by a seizure.
Then you have already opened the wound in the process of healing; but we must now make a cushion under them.
And if it is necessary to put the cushion back into place on their legs, it should be applied to the area of the fissure.
Then treat the intestines so they return to their normal place.
When the boil appears on the body, it's healed by applying poultices.
Chapter 11
And so there are other ways to treat a person who has been afflicted with illness caused by humors.
The text describes the use of a pointed cautery to treat gout in a traditional way.
Therefore, if you are going to cauterize the patient's legs, do so on the left side, for they have called it gout in the past; a cushion should be placed under the patient's thigh and the wound should be cauterized.
And so if it is necessary to make points on the eyelid, then do so with a needle.
Then, however, you should apply a cautery to reduce the swelling in their eyes by using it on those who have other problems.
Then apply cautery to the area where the pain originates. And then place your hand on their legs to protect them.
Then burn the cushion of the wound, and if necessary put a bandage on it.
And if the pain has subsided from their feet after three or four days, it may be possible to treat them with a poultice.
But if you wish, leave the cushion under them, because the plague dries up the body, but they are good for curing the plague.
The pain in the foot should not be feared.
This sounds like a description of how to apply a cautery to a wound in the foot.
And if it is necessary to translate the text, you can use this as a guide for medical treatment.
And you must apply a cushion to the affected area if there are other sores.
If a boil appears on a patient's legs, apply wax to it, and cover it with a bandage.
If you said that some one has fainted, use a cautery on the surface of his/her eyes, and then use other methods to treat the cause.
Then apply the cautery to cauterize the intestine. and he who applies the cautery; for the eye, he uses two small instruments called knives. And you have already cut into the tendons of the body.
Then let us treat the patient's eyes with a poultice and apply the hot cautery to their eye, the cushion will be used for the ailment in the hands, which are called so by doctors.
Mays es un cauterization tool used by doctors to treat disease caused by  cold humors.
And if it is necessary to elevate the eyelid, it is done, and the other places are treated similarly.
And then apply a cushion to their chest and legs, as described below And if it's necessary to cauterize the legs, do it carefully, lest they be too large or too small for the treatment.
Another doctor's hand is needed to hold the other cushion while you place another cushion under their legs.
When the foot is hard, it is customarily treated by cautery.
If your condition is caused by cold humors, apply another cautery to the affected area. And let the threads be kept in their place.
Then place a cushion on their legs, to treat the patient you must use it as instructed by Hippocrates.
And the patient's ailment may be declared as being caused by an infiltration of the hands by the cushion.
And if it is necessary to use a needle on the patient, apply it carefully to their eye socket.
And then apply a bandage to the wound.
Then you will apply the cautery to their hand, so that the patient's foot may be treated properly.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs and do not let them be moved.
And thus you will have cauterized the skin, and so brought relief from the pain to the patient's body, and now you should apply a bandage to the area.
E ajustas a la persona les breus avec un cushion sur les cuisses, et l’autre e·l cois.
The text describes the process of performing surgery on a patient.
To treat the eye, you apply a cushion to the area around the eye, and another cushion on the eye itself.
When the doctors use a cautery to treat the pain in the body or gout in the feet, they will place cushions under them.
Apply a bandage to the foot after you have opened the skin, or otherwise to protect the wound.
And if you have to cauterize, do it with caution and care.
Usa that which is bitter to the taste, such as your feet are affected by the pain.
And the way to heal you from the pain in your limbs is to use the same method as for the treatment of the intestines.
And if heat is applied to the affected body part, it will cause pain in the foot.
Chapter 14
Another, and another on their feet, another on their legs, should be treated as a sign of its severity.
This is a true case of a disease which happens to be called "true" alxacrat, which is found in the leg, specifically in the area around the eye.
Then use a cushion on their legs, or another method if necessary.
The doctors use the term “poys” to describe the pain in the feet as they are accustomed to calling it.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's flesh. Then return the hand to the area to be cauterized and place a cushion there so that the intestine doesn’t protrude or come out.
The patient's body will be treated by making points on their legs, which are covered with cushions.
And in this way, you will be able to tell if someone has Greek fire.
Then if the patient's foot is swollen, apply a bandage to the affected area.
Use ointments to soothe the swelling, and be careful when treating the affected area.
And if you are unable to find a doctor who can help, then go to the other one. And for the rest of the body, you have to apply two other methods, as described earlier.
And for the treatment of the body, it is customary to apply a cushion to the affected area.
And so the wise craftsman should always prepare the cushion in such a way that the intestine will be returned to its natural form by the use of instruments.
Chapter 15.
This person puts their leg in the cavity of the eye.
And if you are afflicted with illness, then apply another cauterization to their eye.
And then you must place your hand on the patient's foot, which you will apply to the affected area.
When you use a cautery to treat someone, remember that gout is a very serious disease.
Then apply salt water to the affected area to make it bleed.
And then apply a bandage to the eye, after applying a cushion under them, to protect the eye from the pain caused by the other.
The sixteenth chapter.
Of which, the first part should be removed and the second applied to the body.
Then it is known that there are two types of gout: one caused by cold, which is called the second type of the body's humors, and the other caused by a blockage of those humors, la qual can be treated in a similar manner.
When applied to the eyes, it is customary for doctors to apply a cushion.
If a patient's legs are opened during surgery, they are exposed to a higher risk of complications. "And if it is necessary to put needles in the body, then you should use a needle on the foot." And then you apply the bandage to the patient's legs.
Then apply a small cautery to the legs and the body of the patient, but be careful not to cause excessive bleeding.
Therefore, apply cushions to the legs and feet, and let them rest in their proper place.
And watch out that the humors in the body don't cause an injury to the pupil.
The physician will treat the affected area.
And if the nail is not painful and does not protrude, the condition may be cured by other means.
And if you want to cut into the flesh, put your hand on the patient's foot. And if you are skilled enough, you can return to the patient's body. Then if you are making a point to be careful of the swelling in their legs.
And apply a poultice to the affected area, and then apply a hot compress to the patient's feet, if needed.
Then perform the operation again on the patient's legs, and let them be treated.
A cushion was placed under the patient's legs, but they are likely to be in pain when you use the cautery there.
And then apply a cushion to their eyes and another to their feet, as it is necessary for them to be healed.
When pain appears in the legs due to humors being affected by the weather, it is customary to treat it as a case for leeches.
And so it is, that from the incision of the leg a swelling arose.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the eyes or parts of the body.
This person was afflicted by a condition where their humors were said to have been driven from the body.
And you must use small instruments for the operation on the legs.
When the incision is made on the leg, apply the cushion as instructed by your physician.
And if a pain remains in a joint, apply heat to that area.
Then apply heat to the body to draw out the impurities in the afflicted area.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
Concerning the collection of [sabel - an unknown word] in the body.
When there are stubborn pains in the foot or ankle, one must apply fire to the knee and ankles.
Therefore, first cauterize the affected area before applying a bandage.
And if you have already instructed the patient to hold their leg still.
And if it is necessary to do more than one thing on the legs.
Then cauterize the veins in the leg and apply heat to them.
And if you apply cautery to the legs or feet, it is customary to use a hot iron.
Then apply the cushion under their legs to treat the ailment that affects them.
And if a person has pain in their feet, it may be called a cushion of a different type.
And then apply a second cushion on their legs, and another in the form of a poultice.
And this is how you do a surgical procedure on someone with gout.
The text appears to be discussing the use of cauterization in treating gout.
A la resta del cos, que es dolut per arizat.
When you cure a person's legs with cushions, then the bones are not healed.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and there is a corruption or blackness within it, apply a cautery to it.
And if a pain occurs in the legs or feet, it is called a sharp pain.
Then, if you know how to use it properly, apply the hot poultice to the area of the bone where the pain is located.
And if it is necessary to make a cauterization on the legs, they should be treated with specific remedies for the condition.
If the pain persists for forty days, the patient should be considered cured if they have good flesh and are not affected by other ailments.
And if you're unable to do so, place the cushion on their legs.
The feet are often affected by cold humors, so they should be treated as if they had gout.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs or knees, you will place your hand on them.
Therefore, if the pain is in the feet, it is due to an imbalance of humors.
When a patient has pain in their legs, place a light cushion on the foot.
The English text is missing some context, so I'll need more information to accurately guess the translation of "Capitol .xx."
"And for the reduction of the swelling of the foot."
And if a pointed tool touches the body, it is called a touch of the disease on the patient.
Then fold a cushion into four folds to apply the treatment.
Then return the patient to their place and apply the proper remedies. And if it is necessary to apply ventosas on their body, apply it on the legs and then on the other parts.
Then apply a bandage to their legs, and treat them for tightness.
And then if the patient suffers from pain in their legs and feet, they should be treated with cauterization.
If the pain in the feet is persistent, place your hand on the ankles.
Chapter .xxi.
Then apply a heated cautery to the patient's eye.
Gird your loins.
Then put the needle back in its place and let it rest on the bone.
And thus they would cure the ailment with a hot cushion.
And sometimes it causes pain to be felt in the feet, which are then treated by a hot cautery on the body's extremities.
Then place a cushion on their legs so that the patient's body does not get cold.
A hot poker was used to treat the patient's swollen joints and feet.
This is about the treatment of gout.
This disease is customarily called gout when it affects the legs.
And if you want to treat someone with gout, then you must apply heat to the affected area.
And if it doesn't subside, you know it's a pain from something else, such as a wound, that causes the pain.
Mays they are about to begin a treatment for the ailment, which we use in your case, as we have discussed.
And so if you have opened it up, place your hand on their legs, and another cushion on their legs.
And if it is a cushion that needs to be used for treatment, then apply it already to the affected area.
Another one, and another cushion, and another cushion on the feet.
This refers to the treatment of a disease affecting the body below the waist.
This refers to a specific type of medical treatment involving applying something to the body in order to cauterize it.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if the pain is in the left eye, apply a cushion to the left eye; if the right eye, then to the right eye.
and then put your right hand on their right side and your left hand on their left side to help them if they are unable to walk.
And if you have already opened the way for the malady to be addressed by placing your hand on their foot, which is near the crown of the head.
Then place your hand on their legs to avoid an increase in pain.
The first part refers to a process of treating the patient's illness, while the second part refers to a specific action taken during the treatment: applying a cushion in the groin area.
And if the pain persists, apply a heated cautery to the affected area, and place your hand on their foot to help.
Therefore, if you wish to have a proper resting position, then place the cushion on their legs, and have them rest there.
And thus, in this way, you will have made a poultice for the patient's body, so that if their foot becomes closed, they can open it again.
This sentence refers to the ancient practice of applying leeches to the body, specifically to prevent the cushion from being used in healing.
Then if you are unable to move your legs because of pain in the joints, it's probably due to a problem with the gall bladder or humors affecting it.
And thus the joints are opened by that which causes such a condition in the patient, that they can be treated with a hot poultice to cauterize the open area.
Another (doctor) can do it.
When the patient's stomach is upset, it is customary to apply points to calm the pain and prevent further issues.
And place a cushion on their chest, so that the body's natural state will be restored.
And the ligament will be closed on the third day.
Then apply a hot compress to the patient's affected area.
And then apply the hot poultice to their legs. And you have treated the patient's body as if they were already four to be healed by the doctors.
And if an abscess forms in the body, then apply a cautery to the area.
When the pain is severe and lasting in the feet, it is called gout.
That's a tricky one! It seems to be saying:
The disciple is not exempt from being pierced by a sharp tool when you are working on the surgery.
And so if he has already been brought to us in order to be treated by fire.
And perhaps, you know, in your location, it is called something else.
And when those are the forms of the species of medicine.
And if they are afflicted by gout or other ailments, their legs should be protected from injury.
The chapter containing the following text continues in its own language.
Then comes the treatment of the flesh by cauterization.
This describes a condition resembling a scorpion sting on the foot, which is painful, but unlike a burn, it's on the surface. Then if the disease is in the flesh of a lion, it is customary to apply a bandage to the flesh that is not of a lion, but of a human body.
Therefore, in order to treat a condition within these limbs. When there's a need for something, another one should be used to make sure that the incision doesn't cause further harm. This is a bad habit or condition that causes pain in the foot.
Then place a pointed cautery on the nose or bridge of the nose. Mays si le nas has been previously affected by humors that have been called “cures” for the treatment of the foot pain.
And if the dampness does not infiltrate the body as it should, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
And so the patient's condition was treated by cauterization when they were suffering from a blockage, or when there was a need to treat any other type of ailment.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body, another part of the body will be infiltrated by the cushion: a common practice among doctors at the time.
Here comes the translated phrase:
And if it's necessary to apply an ointment to prevent further harm, then do so.
Then apply a cushion at the end of the treatment, keep the patient's feet from slipping out, and place another under them.
Then use this remedy for gout, which is treated with a hot compress.
E aquesta lu doneta per lo malaute, e si no es necessary que lo nars, in its entirety, be treated as a whole, with a cushion placed beneath the intestine, put another way, with the use of a catipurg, be healed by fire.
And if the metal or silver is in the form of a small lamp, the wound should be treated as such.
This is a bit tricky to translate precisely without more context, but here's a shot:
Chapter 25.
And if you see a sore on their legs, you will know that they have a disease.
The patient has already developed a boil and it is important to be aware of the dangers of a fevered condition in the body.
And if you wish to have something that is truly a pain in the foot, you are one who will know the cushion for the leg. And apply the cushion to the area affected by the illness, and apply another to the legs, and another to the hands.
The first part of the sentence states that the cushion should be used for the legs.
Then apply fire to the affected area with a hot iron, and let the patient be treated without fear.
E aprop reduce la cosa, e l'altra serveix per la coyssa, e l'altra per lo caba.
And if the lip has to be stitched up, you put a cushion under them, and another on their lips, and another on their foot, leaving the other parts untouched, so they don't feel pain in their hands.
You know that in some men, gout can be cured by a hot poultice.
And now if it is a fresh plague, treat it with the cushion under the affected area.
If the lips of the wound are far apart and open, you should apply cautery to the edges to prevent the patient's pain from spreading. Then apply stitches to the two labias, or cushions, on their legs, and let the patient rest and hold still.
When the intestine or legs are treated, you should know the location of the nerves.
Then apply the proper treatment for the person's condition, known as purging.
When there's an issue of humors affecting the two lips which are the parts of the body affected by this disease.
The patient's body experiences pain if they have a condition called "motto" where the hands are placed to prevent further pain.
And thus if you should find a hard lump or sore in the patient's foot, you can apply your hand to it.
**Chapter 28.**
Make incisions on the gums.
And then let them be burned with a hot iron on their gums.
And apply these to the affected area, or other astringent or emetic powders.
Then cauterize the flesh, but only when necessary, to prevent further injury.
In the former chapter, we see how a surgeon would treat the patient's legs by placing a cushion under them.
Then apply a cushion to their teeth.
And if there are rough spots on the teeth or gums, then apply a cautery to them; for the other kind of pain is treated by another method.
And so put your hand on the patient's legs when they are placed on them to prevent pain in the feet.
If you apply heat to your feet on the first day, you should use it again on their back or chest.
And you know that the patient's teeth are often what cause pain in the feet. E per cushion the pain on their legs or feet.
Capitol .xxx.
On the eradication of teeth.
For no other reason than to treat his pain.
When the tooth is being extracted, the patient's gums should be firmly held by a dental assistant.
And if you want to know what's wrong, be careful about the pain in the body.
And apply a cushion to the patient's feet.
And so, if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use a cushion to protect the body from the heat.
Then, if the patient's teeth or gums are swollen or infected, do so by compressing the affected area with soft cloth and applying a cushion to the area below your hand; otherwise, apply another tool for cauterization.
And if you are concerned that a patient might have a cushion on their feet and you want to avoid pain in the legs.
And when they are already in the process of being treated for their ailments by ignorant barbers, then the following should be done.
And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery on their legs, or other parts of the body, it should be used on the affected area.
When blood flows from the body by way of the veins, it is called gout.
The shape of the thighs and legs are short, thick and fleshy so that they can be used to create a grip for the tools which work on the teeth.
And when the intestine makes a twist or turn, they must be treated by the use of a hot cautery.
And if they are suffering from gout, which is caused by India ink, it is customary to apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
Of the various ailments that may afflict the limbs, the most common is gout in the foot.
And if you have to remove a tooth or set bones back in place, it is best done by a skilled surgeon.
Then, when the patient's mouth has been opened by the removal of teeth, apply a cushion to their legs, or other cushions to the place where the tooth was removed.
When it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or feet, apply the cushion on the outside.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs or other parts of the body, and then use it on the rest of the body with the forceps.
And if they are small, they are called little.
and if it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's body.
Then make a cushion for their legs and another device to hold them in place, as these are needed for treatment.
And then use a cushion to hold the patient's hands in place. And if the pain is in the legs, it is necessary to use special tools to apply cautery.
And if you have a cold sore on the other side, it's best to use a cautery to treat it.
And then you must also know that other tools are used in the same way.
Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area, as it is a disease specific to the art of surgery.
Then in the case of a toothache or pain in other parts of the body, that which we have said applies to the extraction:
And if there are any swellings in the legs, then apply a poultice and treat them accordingly.
And if someone has pain in their legs due to their bones, treat them with a cushion on the legs so that they may be cured.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors that leads to painful inflammation in the joints due to excess uric acid.
And from the healing of the teeth of the patient they are called teeth.
When the toothache occurs, the pain is often referred to as a pain in the "teeth" (denti es) by doctors, but it's actually a problem with the nerves.
E que lo cora do the patient's foot be treated, if needed, but avoid the cushion in your treatment.
Translation 4: And if you apply a cautery to the legs, it is cauterized in a specific way.
Then place a hot iron on the affected area to cauterize it. And then the patient's intestine was burned, and another servant would hold their legs and others on them.
And if it is necessary to open a vein, hold that which you have already opened up.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound in the leg, then apply a cushion to their knee.
Then apply gold or silver to the teeth.
And if the patient has a problem with their teeth, they will be treated with a cushion for the pain, but only after the proper treatment of a wound.
And if the patient has a bile duct, you should use a cushion to support the intestine and another cushion on the other side to avoid any pressure on it. Apply heat to the area where the patient's leg begins its pain.
When you have treated the patient's legs, place a cushion under their feet.
The patient's body was being treated by doctors as if it were already open in their legs, and another on their feet to keep them from being exposed. And place your hand on their leg.
And treat them carefully, or they will be harmed by the pain.
And if you are skilled in the use of the tools, you will be able to apply them correctly.
This is a description of how to treat a person for gout.
And that alone is not enough for a craftsman and wise man to be satisfied.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the body, then do so using the method we have described, but be careful with the location of the application and the duration of time for which it is applied.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And from the ligament which is being affected by the tongue they will be healed.
This ligament, which is called so by nature or which is accidental, is caused by a cause of pain or by inflammation.
The doctors call the pain on the surface of the foot or leg "punz".
If there are signs of pain in the affected area, apply a bandage to help it heal and keep it from becoming worse.
It's possible that the first two sentences are incorrect. The correct translation is:
and a cushion is placed on their legs; so as to apply a label on them, they must be given a cushion for the feet.
This refers to treating gout by applying a hot iron to the affected area. Then place your hand on the patient's ankles.
This sentence appears to be written in a medieval Latin-based medical language, likely referencing the placement of a poultice for treating some ailment.
Then apply this to the legs.
And if a sharp pain occurs in the patient's feet, it is called gout by doctors.
Then open the mouth of the patient and apply your tools to the affected area.
This is a difficult one as it seems to be a mix of languages. Perhaps a blend of Latin and Italian?  It's likely referring to:
E si es la hora for you to treat the body with your touch, and in that moment, it will be necessary to apply a cauteri to the intestines.
Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs and feet; and do whatever else is necessary for their health.
The text likely means:
And if there are other injuries, then keep it away from the ears, eyes, and throats.
When it comes to treating a boil that appears on the skin, apply poultice to the affected area.
And if the pain is severe, you may have to treat it with a poultice; on the other hand, if the patient has a rash or a burn, apply it there.
When the pain is caused by cold humors that are in the foot, and you have already placed cushions on the legs, then you should put your hand on their knees to stop them from being too painful.
E serà per which they have placed their hands on the patient’s thighs to hold it closed or if they are going to be burned.
And it be done with a silver instrument, and another of bronze, for the patient will not be able to withstand the pain of the operation.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's body, place the cushion below the other two cushions. And now, let's treat the pain in the thighs.
And now, let's treat the pain in the thighs. And if a person has a pain in their legs, they are often treated by doctors as if it were a case of gout.
And if this instrument is not present, you will have to use another method for treating them.
And if you have made an incision on a limb, then apply cauterization.
Mandrake and myrtle are used to treat it.
Then place your hand on the patient's thigh to apply a poultice or other treatment to the other.
And you must treat a woman who has been treated with a cauterizing tool in her throat, as if she were suffering from a fever, to prevent her from coughing up blood.
And if a boil has already burst, apply the poultice to the affected area.
And if there are painful swellings in the joints of his legs, and you want to apply cauterization, it should be done with the same on the thighs.
And then you have applied a cushion to his legs, and he must be treated with caution. The cushion will be placed on the body part for which it is intended.
And if you have gout, then apply a cushion to the affected area; otherwise, do not.
This is the chapter number, which means that the text refers to a specific part of a medical treatise, likely a description of a treatment method for a specific ailment.
From the given context, the sentence likely refers to a surgical procedure involving a cut (incise) and possibly an instrument used for making that cut.
And if the catarr is caused by a slight fever, it is called hot-blooded or feverish if it affects the head, but it's otherwise called gout.
Then if you have cured an abscess, know that it is a matter of great joy when the patient recovers.
When treating a patient's tongue, place a cushion under their feet and use a small tool to address the issue.
And if you choose to cauterize them, you should know that the doctors are accustomed to call podagra by its natural name.
And for the treatment by incision, use the hot water that was mentioned.
If an illness makes the patient fearful or if a member needs to be cauterized, place a cushion under them.
When treating a wound on the foot, use a bandage to stop the bleeding.
Then apply the heat of a burning fire to the affected area to cure the illness.
Then let there be a cushion for you to place your hand on top of, and another thing for you to hold the bowels in place with, and let it be dry.
And if there were a pain in the joints, the physicians would place a cushion under them.
And this kind of cure should be done with a cushion, but not with incisions.
And if you see that their hands are swollen, you should know that they are not as swollen as those in a case of gout.
And if the pain is in the mouth, then the patient's tongue should be held by an expert or someone who knows what they are doing.
Do this at the beginning if you are treating their ailment with another cushion, so that the patient's intestines are treated properly.
When there is inflammation in the legs, use a cushion to protect them.
And this cauterization is good for health.
Chapter 38.
And if it is necessary to remove them from other causes, they are treated by placing a cushion on their chest.
And if it is necessary to make points on the spine or legs for some reason, the doctor would then apply the cauterizer.
And then apply the tongue to the pain in the cavity, and you will be able to tell which one is being affected.
When your stomach is full, you will have pain in the stomach, and you are going to apply a cushion or other remedies to the patient's legs if they vomit after being given medication. And if the gout is in the legs, they should be treated with another method.
"Perhaps if you forget to use the proper tools for pain relief, you will be prone to these ailments."
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, you must use a tool that can be used for other purposes as well.
Then place a bandage on the foot to protect them.
The patient must be treated with knowledge of the location of the disease.
Capitol .xxxix.
And so, when bloodletting is necessary on the leg, they will be called upon to assist.
When the patient's tongue is affected by what we have described as being under the influence of humors, consider applying leeches.
Therefore, if you must use a cautery, do so with caution.
And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the patient's foot, you must stop the procedure.
Apointed to be ready for the pain in the joints.
If there are painful inflammations in the foot, they should be treated like a pointed cushion.
And then you must cauterize it (the patient), and then use a hot iron to treat its place.
E = Another =  Another way to operate on the patient’s chest is by using a syringe.
And if you don't drink water, your body may require a change in diet to treat gout.
This means that the following text is from a 14th-century Italian medical treatise, which likely describes setting up a cautery tool for use on a patient. Then if your doctor has made points on the patient's body, he must be called to treat them.
When the joint pain is in the foot.
When there are painful swellings in the body, it is called a boil (in Latin, a "furunculus" or "apolicium" is a type of boil).
And if the patient is suffering from boils, they will be found in the book.
And then use the other as a cushion for the foot to be treated.
And le cushion in the other way.
May the doctors treat the patient's boils with the utmost care.
Then you must apply a poultice to the affected area if it is appropriate. When a boil has matured, you can then lance it.
Then apply another hand to the patient's legs, using a cautery to cauterize their symptoms and alleviate the pain.
And if it were necessary to cauterize a joint, it would be called a "pus-cauterization."
And if an operation is needed on that body part, apply a bandage to the affected area, but use a different type of cautery for each part depending on the location of the infiltration.
Mays is, if an abscess is in your foot, you must know that it is necessary to apply a poultice.
And thus the patient will suffer from pain if you don't cauterize the affected area.
And if it is a small abscess, perform a small incision.
When translated into English, this sentence reads:
And these are the signs that distinguish a person with an ailment from one who is healthy:  the former has pain in their legs and feet, while the latter does not.
And then you should apply the round cautery and the moon-shaped cautery to them.
When it is a cushion you use for the lions that are on the surface, it is necessary to open the wound.
The pain will be less severe if you cauterize the affected area during an exacerbation.
You have already opened the space between the thighs of the patient, and the cushion has been placed under the cushion, and you apply your hand to them.
Then you should apply cauterization to the affected area, if needed, to treat the patient's pain in their feet or elsewhere.
And if the patient is suffering from a festering wound, then use a cushion on their legs to protect the wound so that the patient's legs are not affected.
And if there comes blood during surgery, apply vinegar to the bleeding area.
And if you have a fever, treat it with the remedies described in the text above.
If it is a pain in the foot, then use a pointed tool to apply heat to the affected area.
When in summer, if a boil appears, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then it is necessary to know how to treat the individual parts.
Chapter xli.
This is from the text about treating the bubonic plague.
This is a description of a treatment for pain in the feet.
And of their own lime-like humors: And if they are in need of that which is already there, then apply poultices to the legs and other parts of their body.
And in the opening of the body there is no pain, because they are putting a cushion on their legs.
And so the doctor should use instruments to remove the cause of the pain.
And when the body contains excess moisture, we use this method to treat them.
And when you have cauterized the nerves of the patient's body, apply another cushion to the area to prevent swelling, etc., and another cushion on the legs.
Then you have placed the cushion under them; if not, apply a poultice to their affected area.
Then apply the cushion to the affected area and you will have treated them with an Egyptian salve.
And here comes the instruction for how to treat the patient's legs if they are suffering from this disease. When the patient suffers from pain in their legs due to a cushion that is placed on them by the surgeon using a cautery.
And if you have a bow that causes pain, I will hold your hands to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
And similarly, you have your own words for the treatment of the leg; however, it is said that a similar procedure is done to prevent the leg from becoming inflamed.
Gout causes the body to be already humid; when it is necessary to apply a cushion to their head, it would cause harm.
Therefore, let's move on to the section about other types of wounds, which are dealt with in the chapter on the head.
You already have a physician's hand on the patient's legs to apply cauterization.
Then apply a salve to those parts as needed.
When pain arises in the body, such as in the case of an inflamed member, apply a heated cautery to the affected area.
And if you cut into the throat, it will be treated as a disease of the neck.
And some people say that if you put cushions on their legs, they might say they have a problem with their bowels.
So that I may be free from pain, please hold my hand firmly while using the cauteri on the affected areas.
And the cushion should be used to apply pressure to the affected area.
And apply it to the body in general, as well as to the body's limbs.
And let there be more care taken now lest the vein be opened and the body be cauterized.
This statement means that in case of a wound on the foot, it should be treated by applying a cautery to the affected area (to stop bleeding) or by using other methods to treat the condition and avoid surgical procedures. When blood is drawn from the body.
Return to the patient's legs, they are already opened up by your own hands.
Then apply your knowledge to the other causes of illness.
And if it is a large swelling, apply a cushion to the affected area. If the patient is suffering from pain, then it is necessary to place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet, and hold their hands while they are in pain.
Then treat the patient's body with oil or ointment.
And if you treat the disease by cutting into the skin, then you will quickly find that the plague requires a different treatment than the other two.
Mays there be a need to apply a bandage to the wound.
When the body is affected by phlegmatic diseases, such as those causing swelling, one must be careful to apply remedies correctly.
and apply a poultice to the area where the cushion is placed. And if you have treated the area and healed it.
Chapter 43.
When you cut open the patient's foot and expose the abscess.
Ancient physicians were known to use heat to treat the body when they saw fit.
And this is how the ailment is written in the book of medicine.
Then apply pressure to the skin around the affected area, but gently, so that it does not become inflamed.
Those who have gout should avoid using cautery on the mouth or feet because it causes pain.
Therefore, if you are treating a patient who has a problem with their feet, those four circles indicate that they should be treated as an open wound to prevent further damage.
And if the physician is afraid, put the hot iron on their chest to prevent them from dying.
Then return your hands to the patient;s body, et another on their chest.
And then leave the patient's illness alone for a while.
And if the disease is a plague that affects the legs, you must be careful with the use of heat.
And to heal the flesh, it should be administered to the body.
And if there are cushions on which the patient has been sitting to prevent them from getting cold, they should be removed so that the patient doesn't suffocate.
Then let a doctor be in command to leave the illness open for three days; then treat the disease with something else; if the disease is caused by cold humors, they should be treated as soon as possible.
Then I put a knife to the wound on his leg.
Therefore, we must understand that the gouty condition is caused by the infiltration of cold humors into the body.
And if you have opened the vein on the foot, then use other methods to improve the patient's disposition.
And now I say that in the foot's case there is no fear.
Chapter xliv.
A cut on the body near the throat, outside the body, which is called a hernia.
And this is what happens to the throat in case of an abscess or infiltration.
This is a disease, a cushion should be placed under the patient's feet.
In this case, it refers to the patient's legs being affected.
Then return the patient's hand to the cushion. And if the intestine is inflamed, cauterization may be applied. And if you see that the patient's body is cold and stiff, then use a cautery to apply heat to the area to help the joints heal.
This is the 45th chapter.
Of the various types of swellings in the body, there are some that occur on the legs and feet.
From the nodes, you can tell all the different types of humors.
And so that you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, apply cautery.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the intestine if it is inflamed, as well as the affected joint.
And if there is no heat in the legs, it means the patient has no fever.
And if it is necessary to treat swelling in the legs by cauterizing them, it is customary to do so with a cushion under them, as well as for other parts of the body where there are swellings.
And if it is necessary to make a burn on your body, put a cushion under their legs, and another cushion on the chest.
This is a description of how to treat someone who has gout, which is what the text means.
And apply a poultice to the affected area as needed, based on its severity.
And if you are to cauterize it is necessary to use a sharp tool.
Then apply the cautery to the body, but don't use it on the feet.
This is a tricky one! It seems like the text might be describing how to treat a specific ailment. And so if you are skilled at surgery, you will know how to treat the first degree of this kind of pain, as well as its cavity.
And if the legs are broken or injured, you should apply cauterization to them.
And if the body has a little too much or a little too little of something, the disease returns when the body is in a different state.
And if there is some disease in the leg, it will be treated with cautery by the doctor.
When there is a large amount of pain, you should apply hot compresses to the affected area.
And if it is a vein that pulses, or a vein that does not pulse, you should apply a cushion to it for three days.
Capitol .xlvi.
From the cutting instruments and tools used in surgery, to which part of the body are they applied.
These are already instructions for a treatment.
Then the doctor will apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and they are ready for the treatment.
"And another way to treat the patient is..."
Let the patient's veins be cauterized if they have pain in their joints.
And if it is necessary to open up the bowels, you are dealing with a very serious case of gout.
And if the pain is great, I will be the one to say what to do.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, taking care not to let it cause further pain.
La forma de experient means the way to treat.
Gaiters are used to cover the legs and prevent them from becoming cold.
The intestine should be treated for other ailments.
And then the patient should be cauterized, using an instrument to cauterize the affected area, for which the use of erm citri is recommended.
And if you have to apply a cautery to them, you must also remember their pain in the feet, so that they are treated by those who know how to treat it.
The passage likely describes how to treat gout, specifying that the treatment involves applying heat to specific areas.
Lead-based on the legs:
Lead cautery is used to treat burns on the body.
When treating gout, an illness caused by cold humors in the foot, place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from being uncomfortable during the treatment.
The patient is one who has a specific shape of nails.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, you should apply cauterization.
And these are the three types of phlebotomy.
And if there are three curves in their joints, then they are of the kind they call rheumatism.
Then place the cushion in its proper position.
The text mentions a "simple form" but also refers to "another" in its context.
"Auer altri, et altre on their legs." This refers to the practice of using a hot cautery tool for medical purposes on the patient's legs. And if you are making a cut on the foot, it is customary to treat it as a minor wound.
And so, having three curves.
Forma of a three-pronged attack:
These are the ways to treat nodes and abscesses with the aforementioned methods.
The form of the body for which a cushion is needed between the legs.
Forma del Scapel means "form of the scapha" (a part of the ear).
This answer is too short to be helpful. Could you please provide me with more context for the translation?
For small wounds on the limbs, apply poultices to calm them and for larger ones, use a cauterizing tool.
And you will know these are the forms of three types of ailments: gout, which is also called podagra.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and treat with a hot cautery if necessary.
And if you want to apply cautery, use a cushion on the affected area.
The form of the illness called gout in some way affects the body. And then place your hand upon the patient's legs.
There are three types of bloodletting, but there are also three types of cupping methods.
And if you must apply cauterization to the foot, use a round and hot tool.
These are examples of how doctors used to treat various ailments in the past.
"And therefore you must use a cushion to cut off the blood flow to the legs and arms, but only on the fleshy parts, and place it in their fleshy areas with care."
And if it is necessary to reduce pain from a condition called "other things" (the cushion) for the body, then apply those that are similar to those; which tools are used for these.
And another way of saying it was done by placing a cushion under them.
The chapter title suggests that this section will describe the contents of the chapter, which are the rules of medicine.
When discussing milk-related ailments in men, they are often mistaken for gout.
Some people say that some cushion for the chest (for men) or breast (for women) can help prevent other ailments caused by the cold humors.
The patient's body is opened up for a small incision to be made, and the wound is cauterized.
And if the patient has a large opening in the thigh, you must treat them with a specific method for that ailment, which may include applying a cushion to the affected area, and a cushion under their other parts, as well as covering them with two other things.
E so if you have a sharp pain in the joint being treated by the plague doctor.
Chapter XLVIII.
A sharp instrument should be used to open the wound on their leg, and another person should hold it open while you cauterize the boil.
And if another person's humors are causing them to have painful fits in their legs and feet, it is necessary to use a cauterized needle to make cuts on the skin.
And if you are treating a case of leucorrhea, and have removed some of the pus by placing a cushion under them, then you should treat it with a cautery.
And so the patient's ailment, whether it be treated or not, will be cured.
When it is necessary to drain the pus from these conditions, you use a cautery.
And if the plague has spread to another limb, then treat it by cauterization as we have previously described.
Another one for the history books! This looks like a quote from an old medical text, where they may use Latin terms to describe anatomy or procedures.
This sentence describes treating a patient for gout, likely through bloodletting or applying a heated instrument.
When the skin is broken, and inflammation occurs in the area, then it is known as a wound that has become infected.
When by the veins is meant a vein-related ailment, it is applied to the legs of the patient.
And if the patient's body has been opened for gout, it should be avoided.
Then cut it (the foot) into the affected part; the cushion should be placed on the leg, and the other (on the foot), so that the intestine does not protrude further.
The patient's legs are being treated by applying a hot iron to them.
When placing a point on the patient's feet, they are protected from the spread of infection.
And if it is necessary to treat an ailment, apply treatment to the cavity where the ailment is located in order to heal them.
E tu has es que you will apply a cushion to the affected vein and another on the patient's legs, while the other leg needs no further treatment.
And if you want to cure the patient from their illness, make four incisions by placing them on their body.
Then you cauterize the wound on the patient's leg to prevent the humors from overflowing.
Then place the cushion on their legs so the patient can be treated for hot humors.
And so forth for the treatment of all other inflammations.
And if a patient has a pain in their bowels, treat them accordingly by putting a cushion under them.
And if it is caused by cold humors, it is customary to apply a cautery on their legs or feet.
And when there's severe pain, apply the cautery to the affected area.
When you have to treat an infection in the body that is already being treated by applying a cushion to their sides, they are not your responsibility.
Therefore, cauterization should be used on those who have joint pain, because it's customarily called gout.
And apply the cauterizing instrument to the head or temple. Mays is a hot poultice for the body's ailments.
And if it is a large pain, then apply a bandage to their legs and they will be healed.
Chapter 51.
Your foot will be affected by a hot cautery.
Then the doctor will apply a cushion to your stomach and feet, as the pain is caused by humors that have become imbalanced and require a more nuanced approach than just calling it "fungal."
And he was to be treated for the humors that were in his legs because he had a pain in his feet.
And if they are suffering from an illness in which their body is inflamed by excess humors, you have already opened up the space between the patient's thighs, and applied a hot cautery to them.
And if the patient has a problem with the inflamed humors, apply a poultice to their legs and treat them for gout.
And if the operation is done on the leg that's swollen, use a cushion to prevent the leg from being burned by the cautery.
And if you are going to cauterize the affected area (the intestine) on the patient, use a fresh cushion for them.
E altere ajustat in the strictura del fil de plom; donc, non cesses strenua, et in theil.
Mays so theil (the) si (if) you are a physician, then apply a cushion to their knee for pain in the legs.
Mays possibla is probably a cushion used in treating the ailment.
And then cure that which is ailing in the patient's body.
And you should be careful, because if you cut into the wrong area, it will lead to complications.
And you have already opened the space on their legs.
This text appears to be in a made-up language, similar to how one might imagine a medieval Latin-based medical term would be written, but with added phonetic elements to make it sound more archaic.
On treatment for the pain in the legs.
And so there are many reasons why the doctors say that the intestine or other parts of the body may be affected by humors.
And another way to treat the patient is by cauterization. And if the humors are pressing on the feet, you should be careful in treating them with a strong hand, for they can be dangerous.
The body is humid if it's swollen, and you can't see the cause.
And then place your hand on their feet, applying pressure to prevent further swelling.
And if the body is heated, the intestine will be too, which may cause gout in other parts of their body.
And if it is caused by wind, the patient will be lying down in bed with a cushion under their legs and another on their chest.
This refers to the use of cauterization to treat gout, which is a painful condition that causes inflammation.
And if it is the case that you have to cauterize or apply a hot iron to your patient's exposed body parts.
E si tu,  le has trobat en la hora de l'apoptosis.
You have found the following: you must apply a poultice to the patient's foot and treat them with another poultice on their legs.
Mays if you have a wound in the legs or joints, it is called four humors to be present in the body.
And if you want, remove the needles that are used for the treatment of the patient's body, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
This translates to: And if it is of fleshy origin, from the fleshiness of the belly, the patient has a build up of fluids which causes pain in the abdomen.
Chapter 53.
Translation 4:  The treatment for gout (for the foot) involves the use of a cauterizer.
In the case of pain in the legs, use a cushion to support them during treatment.
E dicit que the ancients say that some pains in the chest can be cured by applying a hot iron to the affected area.
When cold and hot it hurts, only a doctor should be called for that.
This sentence describes the symptoms and treatment of the Black Death, which often involved severe pain and swelling in the extremities.
Then, place your hand on the intestine to make sure the operation does not cause a protrusion of the abdomen. And if it is necessary to apply cautery, you should apply it lightly.
Maybe if you cauterize the blood vessels when they are blocked by excess heat or blood, then you can stop the pain from causing further damage.
The first sentence begins with "E" which in Latin-derived languages typically signifies "and". This could be a continuation of a previous passage.
On the treatment of swelling in the legs.
The text discusses the use of medication for treating conditions related to the body's humors, specifically mentioning that some are treated with a poultice (a soft, moist mass) applied to the affected area and that they are associated with specific symptoms.
And if the body needs to be healed by fire, the doctor is the one who uses tools like cautery.
A cushion will be used to treat the patient's body by other means.
Mays si the body has been affected by too much water in the intestine, and the patient should be given something to stop the excess water from flowing out.
He placed his hand on his legs during the operation, which was to be done by means of cautery.
This passage refers to the treatment of dropsy (edema) by using a cautery on the abdomen.
If the cause is due to a fever then they should be treated with bloodletting.
This means: When the patient’s illness is caused by an excess of humor in the spleen, the pain spreads to the chest.
E no cove que la tua masia o cushion be placed on the side of the patient's body.
And place a cushion on your thighs, so that the patient will not be in pain.
And if you want to perform an operation on the chest or back of the foot, then place it under their feet, and another under the patient's knees. Place a cushion under it and apply other instruments to hold the intestines open. This is a tricky one! It seems like you've given me an example in a language I don't recognize as standard English.
And if you have already placed a cushion on the patient's legs, let them be ready for the instrument, for they are going to be purged by an instrument.
And the physician must know how much to remove from the patient’s bowels, for it is by their condition that he will determine what is good for the patient, and he will be able to tell them this.
And apply the instrument to the patient's foot according to the method of the surgeon’s practice, so that the cold humors are not inflamed by the use of the lancet.
And you should apply a hot compress to the affected area after the initial treatment for fever has subsided.
And if you are treating a patient, make sure to use a poultice on them.
And place your hand on their stomach if you want to stop blood flow to the area when using a cushion.
This is a possible continuation of the text from an earlier chapter in a medical treatise.
And let them be treated with a hot cautery for pain on their legs.
Sometimes the intestine is enlarged in its place, sometimes they are affected by the humors on their feet.
And thus the patient's body is treated with a cauterization.
And apply a poultice of lead to the affected area.
Et your hand be placed on the intestine for the patient to be returned.
Then, if the pain has spread to the legs, it is customary for the doctor to place a cushion under them.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es que the patient’s legs are covered by a blanket, so that you can see what the translation is.
This ma is de les mas, et al which means, “And if there is pain in these parts, that’s what this illness is called.”
This is a description of how to treat gout using cauterization, which involves applying heat or fire to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient, it is best to do so when their bowels are loose from illness.
**Capitol .lvi. **
The foreskin must be treated for any swelling or pain in the foot, otherwise use the cautery on the affected area.
This sentence likely describes a painful condition:  "And if you have already cauterized the intestine, and are treating the affected area, then apply another cautery to the legs, and use a third hand to hold the other leg."
And one is called malignant and another benign.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the feet, then use a poultice to cure it.
And if they have gout, put a cushion under them on their leg.
And if the pain is due to an injury to the foreskin, then you are worried about the possibility that the patient might have their foreskin cut off.
Then you have to use a cushion on your chest and apply the other poultice where the error is, and apply another poultice on the affected area.
And if there is an other cautery that heals the ailment, the patient's legs are treated by another.
Thus you will treat a wound in that manner.
And if the body is affected by corrupted cautery, it will be treated with a cushion.
And if you want to know how bad it is corroded, you can use a measuring tool called a "vergua" to determine the amount of damage.
Then place a cushion under the patient's legs and apply it to the legs.
Then return the patient's legs to their proper position.
And another on the other side of the body, which was previously opened to stop the pain in the leg, so that the pain may not come back again.
Then apply a cautery to the area to treat the wound.
Another hand should be placed on the affected joint.
Then apply to his legs and feet the following treatment:
When the patient comes, however, when applying a cautery to the feet, if there are other intentions, use another cushion for that purpose.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, they are not cauterized, but only treated by the application of a cautery iron, as opposed to a knife, which would be used for an incision.
When pain is felt in the limbs, the doctors used to call it by other names, but now they use the term "gout" for it. A surgeon must be careful when using a tool on the patient's leg.
And during the operation, you should put their hands on the wound. The child's natural state of the bowel requires cauterization.
And if you wish to cure your patient's pain or treat their illness, use a cautery with two blades.
The next day, apply heat to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat the ailment, it is customary to use a cushion on their legs. And he who has the first-hand knowledge will know how to put them in the right place.
And then put your hand on their back and apply the cautery to the affected area.
This is a modification of the Latin phrase "forma aetatis," which refers to a physical condition or appearance associated with aging.
The intestines are in pain, cushion their suffering with the same method used for those suffering from the pain of gout.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery, expose only the necessary area for the operation.
And so make a cut in the leg at the point where the cushion is placed to apply it.
And if you can't get the pain to subside, then apply heat to the affected area.
After three days, the physician should apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if it is the case that one has a cushion under their legs, they will need to be careful with the pain in their feet.
And therefore, treat that area carefully to avoid further pain.
And if there is pain in the thighs, apply it to the patient's legs, and then use a cautery on their legs, making sure they don't have any pain.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to their wounds, they'll call it by its proper name.
Translation:  And then they will apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Gout is treated by cauterization (opening up the skin to release fluids) or by applying a bandage to the affected area.
And if it is not cured by applying a cautery to the affected area, then it's a case for the surgeon.
And if you place a cushion under their legs, it will be necessary to do so with some violence.
And apply a cauterized instrument on their legs, which are filled with the pain from the other.
Then place the cushion above the patient's belly button for treatment.
And if it is necessary to cauterize it, apply your hand to it gently.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, for healing purposes, if it is necessary to remove the inflammation caused by the ailment.
Chapter 59.
If you apply a cushion to the bladder, it will relieve the pain.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
When applied in the manner described, doctors call it a poultice for those who are suffering from gout. And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs, one for the patient's belly.
At the beginning, place a cushion on their legs and another one under them.
When it comes to the foot, use a cushion or a pillow to stop the pain.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area; if necessary, place cushions under the patient's bladder and whatever else is needed to protect the patient from further injury.
This is a bit tricky, as the provided "translation" hints at a potential medieval dialect or archaic spelling, making it difficult to determine if the translator is referring to a specific medical procedure related to gout.
And if it is made of silver or of tin, and another servant holds a cane in their hands.
Then place a cushion under their legs and apply a tourniquet to the affected limb.
And on the legs of the patient, place the cautery.
And then apply heat to the bladder, but only if it is already warm.
And if you wish to treat the patient's bladder, then place a hot cautery on the affected area; for the same reason, if necessary, apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice to their joints.
Chapter 60.
Peyso as a hot poultice should be applied.
We have already discussed the types of stones that can form in the kidneys and bladder.
And if they are too weak to resist, make a cautery on their legs and hold them down while you cauterize their feet.
When there are stones in the bladder, they are properly called.
And if it’s necessary to speak about the pain of the patient, be concise.
The text describes pain in the feet.
And then treat the children's legs with the other part. May it be called gout when it affects young people.
And if there is pain in the body, it is called gout when the pain is in the legs or feet.
And if the patient's pain is caused by something that has been done to them, the physician must first investigate what caused the pain in their legs.
And then place your hand on the patient's body to soothe them.
And if you are going to use cushions for support, it is best to use cushions on the legs and feet.
E si es un malaute which causes pain.
Therefore, if you feel pain in the feet, immediately apply a bandage to the affected area.
If necessary apply heat to the affected area on the left side of the body, and take care that the child does not have a bowel movement during treatment. And if the patient's stone is caused by a disease of the bones, which causes the pain in their feet/joints to be more severe. And gradually close the opening in their leg, and apply heat to their legs, and then the patient will have pain in their bladder.
Then apply heat to the joint you have indicated, and place your hand on the patient's foot.
E si le metes, if they are able to do so.
And so you have already applied cautery to the patient's leg or legs, and this is the way to do it. And if you need to open the body's cushion, apply another cautery to the surface.
And if you are wise, you will know that it is difficult to cauterize a vein in the foot.
And from their legs the pain is released, and there is no longer a need for a cushion to be placed under them.
Then you apply a cushion to their legs, then another one, if necessary.
The text describes how to apply a bandage or dressing to an area on a patient's body after a surgical procedure involving their legs.
If you cannot control it with a cautery, then treat it by exposing them to a hot bath.
This is a description of how to treat a patient with multiple open wounds on the body by applying a cautery tool to them.
When the pain is severe, you should apply a bandage so that the patient's leg does not experience the same pain in their legs or feet.
And use forceps to carefully remove any waste or impurities from the affected area.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, you will be able to heal the wound. And apply a cloth to the place where you have placed your hand on the cushion so that the patient's leg can be drawn tight.
Then apply a cautery to their feet and place them on the bed, and in three days the patient will be relieved of pain from the swelling by the third day.
And when the patient has been given medicine, the physician will have treated them for their ailment.
Therefore, if you are experiencing pain in the bladder, apply heat to the affected area, and avoid letting the patient's urine out (if they are having a medical issue).
And apply heat to the area of the foot to remove the pain.
And if it is necessary to use all sorts of treatments for the patient's condition, they will need to be treated with heat.
And if you have to make the incision for surgery, it's important to use the correct cushion placement.
And if it is a painful inflammation, apply a cautery to the legs and place them in a cushion.
Then bring them to the doctor's office.
...and apply the cauterizer to the affected area. "Then apply the cushion to the affected area."
When the other organs are healed, the person with gout will feel better.
And so you apply heat to the area, and you have prepared them for their cure. And here comes (the meaning of) the pain between the two bonds. And from there, extract the pain. Then if the patient's feet are cold, hold them in your hands while you apply heat to warm them up.
When bloodletting is performed on someone who has a body that is afflicted by the plague, they will be more susceptible to the disease.
And if there are cushions on the legs of the patient, they will need to be kept in place if you need to apply a hot cautery above them.
And then apply the heat to the affected area.
Another common treatment for stones in women's bodies.
The bone marrow was already swollen and inflamed.
Gout is a disease that affects the joints, and the patient's foot should be treated with cauterization.
The woman is suffering from a pain in her legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or the feet, then do so with other cushions.
And if you know how to do it, another cushion under the patient's thighs.
And the fourth condition is that if it is necessary to cauterize a joint, it is done in women on their legs, so that the cushion will be put in place only after the wound has been closed by a surgeon.
When you have a need, the patient will be covered by the cushion, but they are often called gout.
Mays if you are deprived of that, your other parts are still in the state of being closed off.
And if she was to have a cushion placed upon her foot, it would be necessary for you to apply the cautery to the beginning of the illness.
Therefore, if you have pain in the legs, use a cushion for support and put your hands on them to stop the pain.
If the patient is not a virgin, then place another cushion on their legs.
Then apply a cushion on the patient's feet.
Then then you should cauterize the flesh of the patient, and on that same location, place a cushion, and apply heat to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat them, only apply a small amount of cauterization at first.
And so on, for the body has many types of pain, some are mild and some are severe, but those who suffer from the pain of the gout, which are caused by the coldness in the body, should be treated by a doctor named Pierre.
And if you are going to apply heat to the area of the body that is affected.
And if blood is flowing, apply a bandage to the affected area, and do not let the blood flow out for at least one hour.
And so they say that he needs to apply these tools in his work with the instruments.
And when the blood flows, and you see that it is not from a wound, then know it is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, and you should treat it with the appropriate remedies. Then return the patient's foot.
Then apply a cushion to that area for a few days.
This chapter discusses cauterization techniques used by doctors in the context of treating pain.
Then another cushion under their legs.
Hernia is an accumulation of pain in the joints, which causes pain in the feet.
The other parts of the body are to be treated in the same way.
And put a cushion on the chest where the patient's legs are weak.
And thus the patient's body is cleansed from all its impurities.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's leg, as needed.
And if the moisture is in their body, they are considered to be suffering from the disease known as gout.
And if the doctors cauterize the white cushion, they should do so with a pointed cautery.
And if you want to know the nature of the ailment, then judge by the color of the pain in the inflammation.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's illness, use fire cautery.
And if you are near the patient's two, place the bandage on their legs.
E si es necessitat que tu puttia el teu cos sobre l'altra, because you have already set the other part of your body on the left side, that means the body is over the right side and a cushion should be placed under it.
Then place a hot cautery on their legs to burn out the pain.
And make an incision along the vein that you have chosen.
You should be careful to avoid that you are pierced by pain; the doctors say that it is important to have a keen eye on the quantity of pus that may be present.
And you will place a cushion on their legs.
E so then it is a proper application for a cautery. And if the intestine is open in the leg, apply a poultice to prevent its protrusion.
Mays means "if" and "a cushion" in the context above.
Then apply a poultice to the area to keep it warm and soothe the pain.
When water is gathered in two parts, it is called humors.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose-scented oil on their stomach, et autre.
And if the patient has a cushion placed under them, they should be given one of these to use for the same purpose; a cushion should be placed on their legs (for protection), and then applied with the cauterization tool.
Then you are ready to apply the treatment for gout. And if it is necessary to make marks on the legs, then it is called a Greek letter.
When it is necessary to make the incision larger, do so by burning them with hot cautery.
When the wound is in the leg, do not let the blood flow from it.
And if it is known that the patient has a lot of blood in their intestine.
And if there's pain in the legs, then you should apply heat.
When your body experiences severe pain, you should be burned with a hot iron.
If you have pain in your foot, let the patient lie down; another cushion is placed on his legs, and yet another on his body for as long as needed.
And that they have opened the patient's legs, and apply a wide bandage to prevent it from happening again.
And if it is necessary to pause the flow of the bowels, place a hand on the affected area. And if it is necessary, place a cushion on his legs, and he will be healed by the plague.
Mays si malestar es que a particular time you place a cushion under the patient's legs when they are ill.
A wise man knows that other things are more important than gout.
Capitol 63.
To cut open the chest and your hands are already in place to hold the incision open.
When you see that the hernia is threatening to cause harm, you must be careful to use this method.
And if he has an infection or swelling, they are to be treated with cautery.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area.
And if the cushion or the pain is severe, it will be called an apostema.
E fort leu es la causa de la podagra, e la color es dark.
And sometimes the swelling in the legs is caused by inflammation of the veins.
Gout, which is caused by an inflammation in the body, is known to be caused by the illness of the blood vessels; use a cushion for protection.
When you apply a cautery to prevent the veins from swelling.
E then you can see the symptoms are similar to those of gout.
Therefore, place your hand on the patient's legs so that you can help them.
And if there is adhesion in the body, then also use a round cautery.
When you are experiencing pain in the flesh, we apply cold to your legs and arms.
Then when you have healed the wound, apply a cushion on their legs.
Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64**.
This is about the treatment of a condition called hernia.
Then apply a cautery to the legs if necessary.
This is for fear that the disease may be caused by bloodletting.
But I hope you have cushions on hand to help me understand what these words mean in English:
And if you are treating a patient with a hernia, let them know that they should be treated with a pointed cautery.
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then return your hand to its proper place on their head.
This sentence appears to be describing the application of a cauterizing instrument being used on the patient. Then apply the medicine to the affected area.
Aprop, la plagua is in the leg and foot already.
And if it is caused by a lack of proper care, the testicles will be painful and swollen.
et autre use a redueys le  tummy of the patient in the case of le pain being caused by the body's own humors, the cause of which they should be treated with caution and discretion.
Then apply the treatment to the intestinal hernia.
This refers to a hernia that requires padding on the patient's abdomen.
And if it’s necessary to open up the body, it must be done to the foot or legs, using a cushion to protect the area from injury.
When treating the feet, the physician must be careful to avoid puncturing the skin.
And the sign of it is when pain occurs suddenly in the joints; and if it's a sharp pain.
And when it's necessary to apply cautery to the legs or near the feet, it is called a "hernia zirbal" by the people in the area.
E's some kind of illness or injury that affects the legs and feet.
Then return to the patient's legs and place them on cushions for comfort during their illness.
And if you have pain in the foot, then apply heat to the affected area.
You have already opened the cavity of the testicle, now apply a cauter to the testicle and another to the testicles itself.
E si' la dolor sia in the foot.
Then he will place a cushion under their thighs so that it doesn't move the testicles, and will make sure to keep them from being exposed.
When the testicles are covered in pain, the doctors call it gout, but they do not know what causes it.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the area behind the knee for pain in the leg or foot, place your hand on the area where the cautery is applied.
E cerqua am cercat en la sua place in the body,  And then, the first source says, there are cushions under the legs and on the patient's feet, which are placed in a way that prevents the pain from occurring. If you encounter any pain in the stomach, you'll be treated as if they had the disease of the bowels.
"Then, if necessary, you should apply cushions to their testicles."
And let the patient be given wool soaked in oil; and let it be placed on their legs to protect them from the pain.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs and another hot cautery to the affected area.
And they will cure the disease caused by other diseases in the patient's body, and heal the intestines of the patient.
And if there's a need to cauterize, it is customary for the patient to be treated by a physician.
Then describe the treatment for a condition caused by an excess of humors in the body.
And if you have seen a similar situation on the feet of another person, they are often treated in the following way.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area, and use a heated cushion or cloth to apply heat to the abscess, but do not let the inflammation spread further up the leg.
And cure the plague according to what we have said so that they may be healed.
"Another guessed translation: The other servant placed his hand on the patient's feet, to hold them in place."
Then return the patient's legs to their natural position.
When there is a need for cauterization on the thigh, one should apply the cautery to that area, and another to the other leg, as it were.
And they do not have as much cause to be in pain as the one who has been afflicted by doctors with the burning glass.
The pain in the feet is caused by the intestine being put to the point of being softened and is treated by applying a cushion to the foot; et for the purpose of treating the body,
This refers to treating the patient's ailments by burning them with a cauterizing tool.
And sometimes this condition is cured by cauterizing the affected area, which is done three times.
Then apply a cauterizer to their body and the area where the cushion is placed.
Translation 4: Then another if he is needed on their feet, and they will be in a position to receive your help.
And if the patient has two legs, adjust them to their proper positions on the limbs.
And so apply the hot cushion to the patient's legs, and then use it for their intestinal intestines for another purpose.
For the treatment of the plague, it's common to use a cauterization method.
And the doctors will be able to take care of him if he's sick, but only after the patient is already in a state of health where they can be treated with cauterization on the foot.
Capitol LXVIII. - This text likely refers to a chapter number in a book.
And if you need to soften the bowels or those who have been affected by pain in the testicles.
And if the knee is inflamed, it is often called arthritis by doctors.
When the pain in the thighs subsides, one will need to adjust the two flaps of skin (lips) of the wound to bring them together.
And apply cauterization to the affected area.
And a cushion should be placed on the patient's legs to ensure they are healed.
Another chapter begins with a list of treatments for conditions affecting the joints.
On the topic of castration.
And if it is necessary to apply castration on other animals, this book will be used as a guide for those.
Castration can be done by either attrition or incision.
And so the doctors will cause the patient to be treated by placing the body in a warm bath. And then place a cushion on their legs, so that they don't get injured.
When castrating animals, hold the animal steady and use your left hand for the testicles.
And if there is a need for cauterization, one should apply the instrument to the patient's body, applying heat to the affected area.
Then cauterize the legs, and then the patient will be ready for your touch. And if there are no other causes for their pain, then they should be treated for it with cautery.
This is a description of how doctors would treat gout.
Then it is healed by the use of other remedies for the plague.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Gout occurs in the legs when there is an excess of humors that have been infiltrated by cold.
And when you apply the cushion to the body, it will be applied to their testicles.
Menses in the women's thighs are also known as the burning pain of the uterus.
There are three types of cures: for men, for women, and for those who are neither. And so it is that the first is a proper term for what they are called.
And there is no cure for the pain in the second type of man, but the one who has a problem with the other's testicles, e.g., for the patient's body.
Chapter .xxi.
The slow emergence from a cushion or pillow is known as gout.
And some have been treated for a while with a cauterization in which the patient's hand is placed on their thigh to prevent them from spreading further during intercourse.
And then apply a cushion to the area if you have one.
Then apply the same to the legs.
And if the illness is healed, you should know that the patient has a cure for the plague.
And if we are to treat the flesh as it is found in the body, so too shall we treat that which is affected by the illness.
This appears to be a list of translations from different languages. Can you provide me with the context?
The text refers to applying cautery to the legs of a patient suffering from a condition that affects their feet.
Then, do not allow the woman to have her bowels pierced by the needle, or use a small cautery on the woman's legs and feet. And so it is either natural or accidental.
The doctors have called it a very bad disease that affects the bowels.
You must hold your hand on the abdomen above the cushion to prevent it from being caused by the low humors, or in the case of gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a cauterizer to the patient's legs, do so carefully.
Then if the pain is in the legs, apply a cushion to their feet.
And then he will be cauterized on both his legs, and the patient's intestines were burned.
The patient has placed their hand on the woman's thigh.
And then apply oil to the area or place where they are put on their legs, and place a wool cloth over the intestines.
And if the cushion is thick enough, you will need to cauterize it.
The doctor will know if it's true or not.
Then carefully apply medicines that soothe the pain caused by the bloodletting, such as applying a bandage to the affected area.
And apply a lead cushion to their legs, so the infection does not spread.
And if they have had these for a long time, then administer a poultice to them.
And you should apply another treatment to their legs.
And some other ailments are treated by cauterization. When the veins are inflamed in the legs, they should be treated with a cushion on their feet and another on their thighs to ease the pain.
The text in .lxxiii. refers to the chapter number and suggests the use of a specific treatment for gout.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
The pain caused by the infiltration of cold humors into the body would be called something different.
They are placed on the legs, so they can be kept in place.
When gout affects the intestine and feet, it is treated with a cautery.
Those are the ones who are healed by hot baths are those who have been cured.
And if you wish to treat those who have been affected by the disease of gout, they will be treated with cold compresses.
And then sprinkle powder over the affected area, as needed.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet for a whole hour.
And if the flux of blood persists, apply the following: a poultice of milt (animal spleen), another servant to their arms, and another on their shins, the patient's body should be held by an expert.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs.
Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area, and bleed them.
Then, apply another cushion on his legs and place it in a position to prevent the intestine from protruding again.
And if the patient is healed, they should be called cured.
Chapter 74.
The doctor will be called for the patient's condition.
Some diseases are caused by the pain of the joints in the legs, and sometimes they appear as painful gouty swelling on the feet, or other painful swellings. And if the patient's health is good, you have already opened the space between their legs, and put a cushion on their thighs, and another on their feet.
And if it is a cushion placed under the legs of the patient, we call it an "other" or "second" one.
Adonc cove that you apply heat to the affected area at the beginning of treatment for apostemes.
And you must make sure to keep her in his place with the cushion.
And so the midwife should be consulted for these reasons, which are those that she handles.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs, and use the instrument on the foot. And you should hold a cushion on their legs, and keep the rest from coming out.
The doctor will treat the patient for their ailment.
And if there is an inflammation, and the patient's skin is inflamed and tender, then apply a hot iron to the area.
And if the leg is swollen, put a cushion on which you have placed the foot; otherwise, place your hand on the patient's legs and the other on their chest.
When the patient's pain is in the legs or feet, it means the cushion has been placed on their limbs.
Then apply the healing ointment for two days to the patient.
And if it is necessary to cauterize something, then use a specific tool for cauterization.
And if a wound appears in the thigh, it is customary to treat it with caution, as we have said about the plague.
When bloodletting the patient's legs, it is necessary to use a specific technique for their condition.
And if midwives are needed to treat someone, it is said that they have a foreign humor, or a humor that is not their own.
The midwife must use a cushion to support the woman's abdomen while she gives birth.
And so when you see these symptoms, understand that the intestines have been opened, a cushion should be placed on their legs.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's foot, you should use a cushion on the foot of the patient, and apply the other treatments as needed.
And let a midwife be careful and subtle in all her treatments.
And if you are treating someone for that ailment, place a cushion under them, but make sure to use one's foot as a cushion, and another part of their body, and the other parts of their body as cushions.
When the disease has subsided, the patient's legs are to be closed, and the leg is to be treated with herbs for their health.
And then apply the cautery to the patient's second toe. And apply your hand to her foot to prevent the pain from spreading to the abdomen.
When there is pain in the feet, then they should be cauterized.
And if you wish to treat them, you can cauterize the patient's body parts and the pain will subside.
And if the pain is more severe, you should try to reduce it gradually. And if you are too obese, it is necessary to reduce the weight of the intestines or the other parts of the body which the patient uses for their living.
Then apply a cauter to the veins in their feet if they have a fever, and treat them as follows: place a cushion under their feet, and use another to apply a burn to the skin to relieve the pain.
When the foot becomes inflamed, doctors may recommend applying a poultice and using it to gradually draw out the inflammation with cautery.
Then you should place a cushion under your patient's legs if they are willing to be burned.
And if it is not necessary to cauterize the intestines, then they are left alone.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the body, you must first cauterize the area around the opening of the wound. Then apply the treatment to the affected part of the body.
When the cold humors are cured, one should treat the patient gently. And then apply a bandage to the affected area, and treat the patient with the appropriate techniques for the location of the pain.
And if it is necessary to hold the patient's feet in place, then use a cushion. And if the patient's legs are brought together, they have already been reduced by the other servants, who have placed a cushion under them and another on their chest, and that is how the pain is relieved.
Then if the patient cannot walk, they should be placed to lie down, and the affected area cauterized.
And if the patient has suffered a wound in the thigh, it is customary to place it on its natural position.
The intestine or other bodily humors are already in place. This midwife's work should be done by a midwife carefully handling the patient's body and using cushions for support.
So that the patient's legs are not hurt by the cushion.
Then command the patient to move their hands slowly, then put a cushion under them. The cause of gout lies in the side of the body.
When applying leeches, it is important to consider the patient's individual condition, making sure their legs are properly treated afterwards.
And if you have to cut open the body, you should use the other tools on their legs, and the cushion should be placed under the bowels, so that the dead are treated near the abdomen, with a cushion under the belly.
And if you are a skillful doctor, you will make the patient gently squeeze the affected area.
And then they are given relief by another cushion. And you know, three or four times more than what is usual for twins are the children born from one egg.
And if they are to be applied, which cushion should be placed on which part of the body (that is, where to apply them)
And if it is difficult to treat, you must apply medicine for such conditions.
And if it is necessary to treat a woman's ailment with more than one type of treatment.
The translation would be similar to what was given in Source 3 and 4, meaning:
Then the cushion will be placed on the patient's legs, and another on their feet, which is where the pain is located, so if the pain is in the legs or feet, it is called gout.
And if the patient has an ailment, and thus the use of cauterization is necessary.
The translation is: **Chapter 76.**
When the patient is sick and dying from an illness.
And if the patient's legs are affected by a cushion, you should use another cushion on their feet.
Then, when the pain is in the legs, they say that she has fallen into a swoon.
And if the leg is left untreated, it is customary to call it a cauteri.
And then apply a poultice to their mouth using its proper ingredients.
And if he has an opening in the legs, the midwife will apply it to the mother's womb.
And if it is necessary to cauterize them, it should be done in the appropriate places.
And if there is no cure, they are treated by placing a cushion on their chest, to protect them from further harm.
And if you have already found the cause of the pain in the other leg or elsewhere, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then apply a third cauterizing agent to the third leg if needed.
And if it is necessary to make an incision in the patient's legs, they will need to be treated with a hot iron.
And if the pain is caused by something other than the illness being in their own body, they should be treated differently.
Therefore, if the patient's body has been affected by excessive heat, it should be cooled down, as it is customary to treat hot humors with a cooling cautery.
If the patient has an open wound on their legs or feet, they are treated by the use of a cautery.
And you will place your hand on the other foot and on the two.
Mays use a hot iron to treat the patient if they have swelling in their feet.
And if it is the case that a patient has pain from their joints due to cold humors, they should be treated by a doctor.
And then the patient's hands are treated with the cushion.
Mays es una cosa that is not complicated, it is easily done.
If the patient has another's hands covered by the gout, their legs will be affected, so use a cushion to cover the area, or hold it elsewhere.
When you apply heat to the foot, it will be necessary to have another cushion on hand for the other parts of the body, as well as cushions for the patient's knees and a towel to cover the patient's face.
You have already cauterized the joint pain and the other part by placing a poultice on them to draw out the humors that were causing it.
Mays you apply a cautery to the affected area in order to apply a hot cautery to treat the affected member.
And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, then they must be treated with a cushion placed under them, but their joints are also cauterized to prevent the spread of the humors, which would be understood by doctors as causing gout. Then apply a poultice to their legs and feet.
Then, if it is on the side, it is said to be in the ribs.
When there is pain in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
Then apply cauterization to the area where the pain arises, and apply a cushion there if necessary.
And then you apply leeches to the affected area to draw out the bad humors.
Then apply a hot poultice to prevent the spread of the disease.
And if it is necessary to treat a man's belly or hernia with cautery, I will use another tool for the other one. The patient has a long-term ailment, which I believe is gout, but it will be best to confirm with the physician.
And if he has been treated by doctors for a long time, they call them together to be healed by medicine and not surgery.
Then place a cushion on their legs to relieve the pain.
Then they are ready to say that their hands were placed upon the bones.
Therefore, treat them by placing a cushion on their legs and treating the woman's ailment.
And if there are other conditions in the leg, they are treated by means of cauterization.
Then use a cushion to remove the pain from the patient's legs, using the other methods.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
This is how you treat the swelling in the legs and feet using a cautery. And so the physician may be able to treat the patient's illness.
The patient's bowels are relaxed, and the pain in the legs is caused by an excess of humors.
Then place two cushions in the mouth so that the patient's legs are cushioned and the pain in their legs is lessened.
Shape more similar to that of a cold sore and shape of a cushion.
And if you want to make a cushion for the patient, use one made of ebony or rosewood. But perhaps the pain in the foot requires another treatment, but I will use a different method than the others.
This is a description of how to treat pain in the legs due to inflammation. Then open the space between your own legs, and apply the cushion to the leg, which is how you would place it on a patient with a wound.
This refers to the patient's condition, not the cause.
When the form of treatment is unknown, it's customary to say it's a method for treating the pain in the patient's feet.
and if the pain persists in the legs, then it is called gout.
And sometimes the intestines are inflamed and swollen in the patient. The patient is likely experiencing pain in their legs due to a lack of proper humors.
Another option for the translation would be:
Forma de unci having two meanings: (Translation 1) E.g., a pointed tool to make incisions.
Form of spatulas (used) to apply cauterizing agents are needed for treatment.
Apply a cautery to the intestines or wherever it is needed.
All these instruments are used to treat illnesses by doctors, but they use a cushion on the legs for pain relief.
And so you must apply a cushion to their joints, for they are not affected by the other illness (malaute) as in the case of the other cushion.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs.
And if the patient's humors are causing pain in the legs, you should apply heat to them, and use a cushion to hold their hands and make them sneeze.
And if you are not able to stop the pain, use a needle to pierce the area and apply a cushion or herbs for relief. These herbs or some of them should be steeped in water, and if you need to use them, place one on their legs and another on their feet.
Then place a straw in the mouth of the straw.
Then place a cushion on their chest so they can be treated by the other two cushions.
If the pain persists, you should continue to apply the treatment as described and have another physician apply their hands to the patient's body when you reach that point, it would be best to call it gout and treat it accordingly. Before applying cautery to the body, they must be placed on their sides.
And if the mouth of the patient is closed, we will use cautery to open the foot's cushion.
And if it is customary to apply a cushion to the affected area, then put the patient on their back.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area for gout, it should be done below the knee, but above the ankle.
May you have an understanding of the ancients' knowledge.
This text, written in the language of a medieval medical treatise, appears to be asking about a specific type of treatment for a woman suffering from a blockage of menstruation.
When you have a cushion, their legs are weak.
The doctor uses his hand to apply pressure to the affected area.
And if there are other problems, such as gout, then treat them.
Place another cushion under the child if necessary.
When your body is plagued by gout, which is caused by excessive cold humors in the system. Then open the cushion under their feet and place a cushion on their thighs, so that they will be treated by the midwife.
E a la cushion on their legs, and cure them with a poultice upon the thighs.
Then treat the child's legs with a hot canula and put a bandage on them.
When the illness has settled into the bone and a cushion is needed to treat the gout or other inflammation.
When there are fistulas in the legs, they are often treated by applying heat to the affected area.
The which are called fistulas in the body's exterior or outside the patient's body has already been translated above.
And a cushion on their legs.
The patient has the gout, and sometimes the gout affects the legs and feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's intestines; for sometimes they need to be cauterized, as well as the feet.
When there are many fistulas in the body, they should be cauterized, one by one.
A person's body will be covered with a fine cloth when making a cautery to prevent staining the skin.
When the pain is in the feet, it is customary to apply cold compresses to those who are suffering from gout.
If there's no sign of illness or injury in that area, then you should know that it is called humors by a physician because it is a condition caused by excessive humor.
And then there is a pain in the foot that prohibits movement to the bladder and kidneys.
Perhaps: The pain is severe in the affected area.
The surgeon places his hand on the patient's body to stop the flow of fluids.
And if a cure is needed on their feet, it’s hoped for in a traditional way.
And if you have a cushion for the patient, then use it to support their legs.
Then if that person feels pain in their neck, you should put a cushion under their legs and another on their lap, as well as using bandages to bandage their throat.
When pain in the joints of the body is felt in the form of a throbbing pain, it is customary to call it gout.
Then, however, apply a poultice to the patient's feet, which are affected by the ailment.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the fistula, then apply it gently.
This treatment by a physician is called for, but only if it's due to excess cold humors.
And if it (gout) affects the intestines or abdomen, you will place it under a cushion or back in its place, and you will be able to cure it by using this tool on the affected area.
And then do they treat the patient with a cushion to prevent the pain from spreading.
This phrase likely means "And if you use medicine to treat your illness."
And so apply the cautery to the affected area on the body.
These are the medicines that are used for pain; when the condition is improved by the use of them, it will be healed.
When a doctor finds a fistula or a sore that has formed in the body, it is called a fistula on the surface of the body, and when the fistulae is located inside the body, they are treated by another method.
And if there are other uses for your hands, you may use them as well.
Then treat them as we have said; if the body has an abscess, apply cauterization to that location. Then apply heat to the area around the fistula to prevent it from spreading further.
And if there are any ulcers or fistulas in the body, apply a poultice to the affected area and treat them accordingly.
And if there are other remedies, you can apply a cushion to their legs and another to the skin above them.
And if it be healed, another servant will cure the plague.
And if the patient has a fistula that is not open, and you have to apply a poultice to it, or you have to use another method to treat them.
This is a description of how to treat a fistula, a type of abscess that has formed a tunnel. The physician should apply a cautery to the area to help heal the wound.
When there is an excess of blood in the body, they are treated by applying hot cauteries to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat a person for the condition which causes their bowels to be inflamed or sore you should use another method. And if there is pain in the intestines or limbs, they are to be treated with cautery for both small and large ailments.
And these are the symptoms, which are the same as the others, that are caused by excessive dryness, rather than excess humors.
Then use the following methods to treat those ailments which are caused by cold humors affecting the foot. Then you apply cautery to the legs so that the cushion will be placed on their leg.
Then, if you wish to treat the swelling in the thigh, use a hot cautery on the affected area. And another thing that should be healed is necessary to cure.
Then you have caused the patient to be treated with a poultice.
This sentence means that if there are already cushions under the legs or feet, then place another cushion on their chest.
And if you apply such a method to the body that has a cushion above the knee, then place your hand on the area below the knee, where the swelling is.
Let him use a cushion, let the rest be for the doctor's treatment.
And place another cushion on their back; and another to be placed on the legs of the person having a gout attack. And if the patient has a wound there, treat them with that treatment; and if they have another treatment for them.
And if you are treating a patient with a poultice and using another for pain relief, they should also use a cushion under the affected area so that the affected part of their body does not become moist from the poultice.
When joints are inflamed, apply a cushion to support the legs and feet; if necessary, treat them with cauterization.
When the bowels are inflamed or swollen in the body, then it is customarily called rheumatism.
And then they must apply a hot iron to the part that is already inflamed, and use other tools to treat the affected area.
This refers to using cushions and applying heat treatment to specific areas of the body.
The rest of the body may be treated with other methods for pain relief.
E curacio of the leg is when you use a cushion to apply pressure to the wound. Then use either fire or medicine on the patient's legs.
If a person suffers from pain in the body, they are given three cushions, one on their back and two under their arms.
And if you want to cure le curacio of that which is known as a gouty pain or that caused by a canula, place a canula on the afflicted area for treatment.
And if you wish, do it with a heated instrument used for cauterization.
Let the patient's foot be opened and cauterized if necessary to prevent further complications.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, use a cautery on the thighs.
And upon their thighs, use a cushion to apply treatments.
This sentence seems to be describing the use of specific instruments for treating children.
When translated from Latin, this would be: "the method of treating gout"
Then, let the patient be given a wide cushion to keep the hands warm and the body comfortable.
And if you are using a cushion to close a wound in the leg or a painful swelling.
And if it is necessary to use animal bladder for its remedies, they should be placed on the legs of the patient.
And let the other be cauterized by the other cushion on the instrument called a "knee" in the ancient tongue.
Then place the cushion on their leg to hold the medicine bag, and put your hand on the bag to cover its contents.
Then place the extramitat on the cushion and the extramucous membrane will be elevated on the cushion or the body of the patient will be placed on the cushion.
And if the medicine doesn't work, they will try to burn them off with heat.
The cushion should be placed on the chest to apply pressure.
If your patient has pain in their feet, then carefully apply a hot compress to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, we will apply our hand to prevent them from being opened up.
You have provided a context that suggests the meaning of the text, but without more information, it's impossible to translate accurately.
This person's hands are being held over their legs and feet to prevent them from hurting.
And if the pain is so severe that it causes a person to be unable to bear the weight of their body on the affected area, then they must apply another cushion or use other means to relieve it.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area, and place a cushion under them.
And if it is necessary to stop the spread of the illness, use your reason to guide you in treating it.
The text describes how to treat an illness using poultices and bandages.
And if the pain is in the legs, then apply a poultice to their legs, as you would for a simple wound.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the feet, they should be made with a cushion, and the other things mentioned are also done to relieve the pain.
When you're eating, avoid anything that causes gout.
And when the bowels are opened, apply heat to them and keep the inflamed area covered.
If it is a hot cautery that you must use, be sure to place a cushion on the affected area if used on the feet or other parts of the body.
And then the patient should be given a cushion until their leg is healed.
If the plague is severe or if there are many cuts on their legs, it is best to place cushions under them.
And so you have a cushion for your feet, but a plague has already broken out in the land, which is a disease that affects the body by causing inflammation and pain in the joints.
And if the pain is not relieved by other remedies, you may apply a pointed cautery to the affected area.
If the doctors find that the pain is caused by a disease other than those arising from blood vessel inflammation, they will be treated with a cauterization tool.
And if these sores are simple and small, treat them with a light touch; otherwise, you leave them as they are, and apply a poultice to those that have not yet been affected by this illness.
Take one part of dragon's blood, one part of enses (a type of plant), and one part of crushed garlic, e.g.,
And if you have to apply medicine to someone, place it on their legs if they are being treated for an ailment there.
Then use another cushion to support their legs, and apply a third cushion to the area above the feet.
And then apply treatment to the patient's legs with these methods, for it is believed that the large intestine has been affected by the cushion of the great gout, which is a specific type of plague, and the legs should be treated accordingly.
And if the heat affects them, then they should be treated with ointments made of those ingredients, honey and water, for example.
And if the patient suffers from a broken bone, you must use a cautery to cauterize the wound.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's legs, then a cushion should be placed under them.
When your hand touches the sores on their legs, they are in great pain.
If you are applying a poultice for a simple illness, apply it to the legs or feet.
If a patient has gout, they may experience pain in their neck or feet, which requires specific treatment. The first line should be translated as:
And if it is necessary to treat with medicines a swollen foot, some remedies are applied to it, such as:
If the wound is large, you must cauterize it carefully.
Mays you are already familiar with, if a wound needs to be cauterized on their feet or lower bowels, then you need to use another method for the intestines.
Then if there is an infection in the legs or feet, use a cauterization method that is customary for those conditions.
If the patient has an unnaturally swollen foot, or a swollen gland in the foot.
Mays if the disease in your body has been named as gout, you should make sure to treat it properly.
And if the plague is recent, apply dust to the affected area. And if the patient's bowels are infected, or have a wound, it is customary to treat the wound in the appropriate way.
If there are signs of a pain in the legs or in the feet, then it is probably a case of the plague.
And if there is no cure for their pain, then apply a poultice to that area.
And if the patient's legs are swollen, they need a cushion for their legs, so put another on the feet.
When there are three days or more that pass after the infection, the patient will be free from the plague.
If treatment for the ailment is necessary, apply a poultice to their legs and treat them accordingly.
Then they cauterize them, which helps the body to expel those humors that cause pain.
When the skin is burned with a hot iron, it is customary to call them a burn. If the plague has not been stopped by the use of cushions, then you should apply a cushion to the wound.
And for other ailments, such as gout, the treatment is the same as that described above.
And for the plagues of the stomach, use a cushion.
When the patient has pain in their stomach, apply the cauterizing instrument on their abdomen to treat them.
and so on.
E thus la cushion, for if you are to be affected by the other two, the pain should be treated by cauterization.
And then they will sew the body's wounds together.
And these are the two most common types of sutures used for surgical wounds, but the other one is used for wounds in the legs and feet.
And you will have noticed that they are being treated with a cushion for each ailment.
And then you have applied the plague to the body, thus reducing the pain in the legs by means of a cushion.
And so when the pain in the body is caused by humors, then use a cushion to support the area affected by the pain, which was mentioned previously.
When sickness affects the joints, and pain appears in the foot, apply water to reduce it.
And so when the patient's swelling subsides, apply a cushion to their feet.
Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids, for which treatment?
And so that the patient's body may be cured, it is better to cauterize than to cut.
And use your hand to adjust the position of the body part, as needed.
The patient's acute gout should be treated by applying a cautery to the affected joint.
And then, if the plague is spreading and needs to be stopped in its tracks, use a poultice to help control the inflammation.
When the pain is widespread, they are treated by placing a cushion on their back, but if the pain is in the foot, it's placed on their body and another cushion under the foot.
When there is a sickness in the abdomen, you must consider the other two sources.
This line applies a remedy for pain to a specific body part in the same way to all parts of the body affected by a disease.
When in small doses, pain in the joints is felt by the patient, for which cushion should be used to address the cause of the pain.
E questa que prengues la agula; e si la flor es de color blau, et has posat en la zona on es troba el punt de la disrupcio del dit.
Then apply another cushion to the other side of the body, as needed.
The needles used to treat gout are applied gently between the muscles, as opposed to more painful treatments.
And if it is necessary to put needles in two places on the patient's body, they should be placed lightly and the intestine should be kept from swelling up so that it will not become inflamed.
And if it is necessary to stop the plague from spreading further.
And if you have already opened the patient's legs, you should place cushions on them; another cushion should be placed under their chest.
And if it is necessary to apply stitches on their legs in this way, it is best to do so.
The second type of pain, then, is caused by the needle when used on the body.
Then return to the first part of the body, place your hand on the four parts, and another cushion on their legs, to ensure the needle doesn’t come out of the wound.
Then apply your hand to their legs, and apply cautery to the amount of the toe.
Then this opening would be called a surgical incision.
And so a man's intestines will be cleansed by the purging of the bowels.
The plague was cured within fifteen days or so, and the patient's condition improved.
And if it was necessary to apply cauterization, they would be treated by other doctors.
And according to the story of Paraula, there are two types of suture.
And you must apply the needle to the patient's body, in the place where they were stitched up.
And if the point penetrates into the other parts of the body, let the needle be used on the long bone (of the leg), and another part be placed in the thigh so that the needle does not pierce out the entire length of the limb.
The text appears to describe instructions for treating an ailment, likely using medical terminology from the time. It reads as if it might be gout.
And if it is necessary to drain the excess humors from the body, they are to be treated by placing a cushion below the affected area, which would prevent them from being forced out.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot on the other side, use another cushion on that side.
And apply the cushion under the patient's hands to make them feel better, if they are experiencing pain in their legs.
Then you must cauterize the intestine with another tool.
And so they are to be treated for the second type of inflammation, which is called gout.
When you use a hot needle to draw out the blood from the affected part, the patient's body will be protected by the bandage.
Then apply the other cushions to their legs.
This method of stitching is better than common light stitching.
This is the text of the patient's suffering.
When there are many doctors who specialize in treating illnesses of the stomach and intestines.
You should know that gout affects the feet more than other parts of the body, because they are exposed to more cold humors.
And then the treatment for the plague is used to treat other ailments.
The air will make the plague worse for them, so you must apply the cushion to their body.
And if you have to treat a person for an ailment that affects the hands, it should be done as follows.
When plagues are simple, then these remedies should be applied to the feet.
Then apply a poultice to their legs and keep it there.
When a person experiences pain or swelling in their intestines, they are said to have cramps.
And it is easier to heal if the ailment is in the large intestine than in the small intestines.
Then apply a cautery to their legs or chest to prevent infection.
May this be a modern translation of "Mays" to "Perhaps there are also those who believe that the buboes will be cured by making them swell up even more."
And by means of this treatment, you should apply a cauterization to the leg using a hot or sharp tool if needed, but be careful not to burn the patient's gut or where the cushion is placed.
And if you've done that, then you should apply the poultice to the affected area, so that the pain in the leg subsides.
Then apply a hot compress to the affected area.
If an opening in the body was caused by the disease of gout being present in the leg, then it is possible to cauterize the area with a cushion, but if the disease has affected other parts of the body, such as the foot and stomach, it is necessary to treat those areas with a different approach.
And then apply cauterization to the wound after it has been cauterized.
And if you have already treated the patient for a suspected case of humor-related illness, apply heat to the affected area on their thighs.
And other experienced people apply the poultice when there is a need for it, and it is necessary that a cushion be placed upon the patient's knees and then you tie the bandage around the affected area; if they are not tied correctly, the bandages will become loose.
And so apply a cushion to the affected areas.
Then you must take care to treat the illness as a cushion for the leg and other parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to make points on the patient's body; these are made with the tool called a cautery.
Then use this method to prevent further complications from ants.
And if it is a serious illness that affects the body and spreads widely, the plague can be cured by medicine but the person may still suffer from pain in their bowels.
The text refers to treatments for a type of painful inflammation in the body, likely a fistula.
If you are wise, you know that when the body is affected by cold or other ailments, it is customary to call them boils.
And if it is truly necessary to treat the patient's condition.
And if it is necessary to hold their legs for a long time. And sometimes this moisture is in the form of phlegm, which is thick, gross, and subtle.
When the physician has opened the patient's leg to relieve the pressure from a gout attack, it is necessary to use other methods to relieve the pain.
And let me know which part of the body needs treatment.
And if they are skilled in treating fistulas, which can be found in all parts of the body, such as the veins of the leg or in a bone, then one should know that it is necessary to treat them with surgery.
Therefore, the wound from that which is caused by those who make a living from bloodletting in this manner is one of the difficult illnesses to cure, and it requires skill and knowledge.
If you are dealing with diseases of the body, such as gout, it is important to keep the patient comfortable during treatment.
Mays es que l'an has a fistulous tract that needs to be examined, one should place a cushion on their legs and examine them.
The patient's fistula is now ready to be treated by cautery.
Then apply a poultice to the other, for it is by means of such a thing that they are cured.
This passage describes the use of cautery in treating ailments related to the feet.
And now, when you have opened the area near the fistulous opening.
Then return the patient's legs to their natural state, for they are afflicted with pain in the joints.
And if the fissure is deep, you must place a cushion under them in order to treat a secondarily infected fissure, for it is customary to do so; but if it is necessary to treat a fissure of long-standing nature, then use an instrument to remove the infected part.
And if you wish to stop the pain from gout or other causes in the legs, place a cushion on their feet.
Aprop apply cushion to their legs, et if there's an inflammation on the feet, et another place cushions upon them, they will be healed by a good physician.
Mays is the Catalan equivalent of "May" which means "go" in this context, so you would need to translate it as:
And if the cause of the ailment is in the intestines or other vital organs, you will find it necessary to inquire about its nature, which requires a physician's attention.
When the pain is caused by the foot swelling due to an excess of black bile, then apply cautery to that area.
Then if it is not healthy, you will cauterize the intestine in order to cleanse and heal it.
And therefore if it is not cured, apply heat to the legs.
And if the bone affected by the ailment is small, you must use forceps to remove it.
And if the gout arises, apply your strength to them.
Then apply a cautery to the ligaments or flesh of his body, if necessary, and heal the other parts.
Then place your hand on the patient's body to ensure the cautery doesn't burn them.
The patient's pain is relieved by applying an Egyptian ointment to their bones, which are being treated for their pain.
But if the wound in the foot is corrupted, it is the same as if he were to be afflicted by plague.
When the intestine has been opened by the use of cautery, there is a large opening in the patient's body.
Then you should be careful that no other servant attends to them for that purpose.
Then make another incision in the area where the leg is affected.
When the body's humors are cold, they say it is poyredura; when these are hot, they call it an error in the treatment of a member with a poultice.
And then the doctor will treat the patient's ailment by applying cauterization for two years.
And place a cushion under their legs; so as to help the patient, it was customary for doctors to use.
And then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then carefully place your hand on the area to be treated.
And then you must place a cushion under the patient's feet.
And then place a cushion on the legs of the patient, and treat them for their ailment.
Then I apply the cauterizer to the patient's legs and feet if they have been afflicted with pain caused by corrupted humors in their bones, and place a cushion on his chest, preventing the corrupted fluids from causing pain.
Then apply the treatment for a long time to the patient's feet and let it be done by a specialist in the field of medicine.
And if the body is in pain, and a secondarily caused wound occurs, one should cauterize the area.
And for the patient who suffers from pain due to a cushion being used on their legs, they should be treated by cauterization.
And then if a doctor has been called for pain in the leg, they are putting pressure on the tendon to ensure its integrity.
And it is not necessary to cauterize the intestine in the operation of gout.
Then, if the patient has gout or a similar condition, they are healed by complete cure.
And if your foot needs to be treated by opening the cavity and extending a cushion under it, then you can place it on the cushion.
And then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, so that the intestines don't swell up.
Then slowly the bone will be corrupted if it is exposed to the humidified air.
If a wound is already exposed in the thigh, then you should apply a cushion to their legs to prevent the corruption from spreading and use another cushion on their chest so they don't get a hernia.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, another area may be treated with a cautery.
If the pain is in the joints, apply the cautery to the affected area using a technique that involves applying the tool to the leg or foot.
And if there's a problem with the intestine, a doctor should be called to perform an operation on the patient's legs and fix them, etc.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area, and if the pain persists, use a hot compress.
"Then prepare their bones for burning, and you will need a cushion to place under their legs and hold them while they are burned."
Then you are wise to know that in a matter of pain, you should consider using your knowledge of the art of medicine to heal, and not just to open up the patient's body.
And then you should put the cushion on the legs of the patient. And if it is a cushion that causes pain in the legs, apply it to their legs.
A form of gout that affects the legs is often called sciatica by modern doctors.
A form of large-scale surgery.
A doctor's recommendation for treating joint pain by using cautery to alleviate the pain. Let the star-shaped humors be applied to the patient's head in a specific way.
And apply cushions to their knees, for that is what physicians recommend when joints are corrupted.
A form of gout that causes pain in the legs and feet.
A form of a razor is used to treat pain caused by humors in the body.
When there is pain in the foot or leg, it is customary to use a pointed cautery on them. Another way to say "of the" or "for the" is "on the" in the context of the body.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body of the patient.
The cushion under them should be placed on the legs, not on the feet.
This sentence describes how to treat a limb or joint using a tool that applies to heat and another that uses a specific cauterizing method.
This appears to be a phrase from a medieval medical text, likely describing the treatment of a patient.
And so you have it, the shape of the tooth is important.
Then apply the proper treatment to the affected area.
When there are signs of inflammation in the body, then apply cauterization to the affected area.
The first sentence is translated as: **And if it is necessary to make points on the body, then it's a good idea to use cautery.**
And if it is iron from India, it will be called the same as a hammer.
The cushion should be placed on their leg to prevent pain during the operation.
Then return to the original point or apply a different treatment method for the ailment.
When the belly is swollen, it will be treated with a poultice on the legs to reduce swelling and pain.
And similarly if it is necessary to make incisions for medical purposes, they should be made by the physician or surgeon.
And if on their little finger or hand you place a cushion on the hand, you are treating the digit.
And if you cauterize the foot, place your hand on their chest, while burning the inflammation.
You put your hand on the patient's arm, and you will cauterize the limb if necessary.
And when it's necessary to use another cause for cauterization, it means that you have already applied a treatment for the illness.
And similarly, if you are dealing with a patient's foot, it is customary to use a cushion for support.
E so then, you place your hand on the patient's foot, where they are lying down. Perhaps it refers to the process of treating someone who has suffered an injury to their legs or feet.
Then treat them with cauterization, for it is the only way to stop the pain of the feet.
And the way to cut or cauterize the body part you wish to cut or sever a ligament on the leg of the patient is what the surgeon would do.
And if there are cushions on all sides of the wound, it will be protected from further damage.
Mays it's best to apply cauterization for a moment when you have a hernia.
And apply to the affected area where it's needed.
This sentence describes the process of applying cauterization to treat a medical condition.
And then the cushion should be placed on their legs because of the pain in their feet, one should apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then the patient's pain will be cured by applying a poultice to their legs, and another poultice should be applied to the area where the pain was located.
The intestine is infiltrated by bad humors in case of pain you already have.
A cushion was placed on the legs to help stop the intestine from protruding further.
Then if it was already open, they would apply a cautery to the area where the patient’s pain is caused by their excess of humors.
And if the body is being opened up by an ailment, the doctor has been called.
And then place a cushion under their legs to protect them from the pain.
On their treatment and prevention using medicines.
And the patient's legs are swollen and they should be treated with a cushion.
Perhaps, however, the patient's leg was swollen due to a prolonged case of the evil eye.
And that is how you treat the pain in his legs by using a poultice, but be careful not to cause more harm than good.
And then you apply a hot poultice to the feet if it's necessary for treatment.
And if you have a foul smell in your veins, and another who will serve as a vessel for them, and you are to cauterize a patient, put a cushion under their feet.
And you have placed a cushion on their legs; if the pain persists, treat them as those for the other parts of the body.
And then apply heat to that area.
Then sometimes it is poulticed with water from ashes, and at other times it is necessary to cauterize the intestines with fire.
If the patient has no tolerance for being cauterized, then they are already prone to the first condition, which is known as the "evil."
And if the one who has been inflicted upon by the ailment comes to have pain in their legs, put the cushion under their knees.
And then treat it with a poultice for healing the wound; but apply a cushion soaked in other remedies to prevent further inflammation.
And if it is necessary to amplify the sinus, gently do so with a small instrument.
Similarly, if the orifice is large, then burn it as much as you need to.
And if it be necessary to cauterize a limb, lest it spread elsewhere.
Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area to stop the pain from the cushion and use the other tools to help your body heal itself.
Mays that which you have described be done only to the patient's thighs. Then the doctor knows if it is a little or much pain, and whether the pain is caused by inflammation in the arm or not.
Then consider whether or not the patient feels pain in that area.
Then apply the medicine in this manner, and if it doesn't work, you should use a cautery to create a burn on the surface of the foot.
And then apply to the flesh of the patient those who are in charge of it.
When the stomach or other parts of the body are affected by bad humors, they use a poultice to treat them.
If the patient's legs are already painful, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
The Translation provided for the text: "And if you must apply a remedy to the wound in the body, then do so carefully."
And sometimes they are prescribed to be administered as cures by those who know the nature of the ailment.
And if the pain persists, then you should seek treatment for the ailment.
And they come to treat them, and another cushion should be placed on their hands.
The first part of this text describes a situation where a physician has to use various techniques to treat a patient.
Then apply your own judgment to use the hot iron for treatment on their body.
If the bone is cold and the nail is healthy, then use a poultice to draw out the blood and apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
And if there are humors in the legs, which is the cause of gout, then you must cauterize them.
And if you apply a poultice to the affected area, which should be healed by now, use the other one on the legs.
When the joint pain is caused by a blow or injury to the foot, it is called "another" if it arises from the bone, and "a cushion" if the pain occurs in the area of the body below the knee.
And if someone's legs are swollen, then they are covered in a sheet or blanket.
A pointed pain in the legs or feet can occur when there is an imbalance of humors. And if you are experiencing pain in your legs, it is best to avoid exertion.
And those who are born fleshy, they should be cauterized by a doctor in their early years.
The first part of the sentence suggests that treatment for something difficult to translate is being discussed.
Thus, in such cases, the physician should use a cautery to burn the area around the knee and then close it off.
Then, if it is caused by something like an illness or inflammation, it will be treated naturally occurring in the man who suffers from it.
And if the patient's hands are affected by the very cold, you must apply a cautery to the area of the gut where the pain originates.
And similarly if you have a cushion on your hand, apply it to the leg of the patient.
Then you have made incisions for the patient's varicose veins.
Vices are a cause for pain in the legs, which can be felt more strongly in the lower legs, especially by those who have a wandering disposition.
Then apply a tourniquet to their legs and another cushion on the chest to prevent them from black death.
The cure for gout depends on the nature of the ailment: either by drawing out the corrupted humors or by removing them.
When necessary, the legs should be opened and bandaged at the beginning of treatment.
And then hold your hand over the patient's pain.
Perforate the blood vessel to remove excess fluids from the affected area.
If the patient's bowel be painful, so that they must be treated with hot water, apply strong hand pressure to the area.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery, you must apply it only where the pain is felt.
Aprop  you must open the vein for the legs to be used in medicine, and then apply the appropriate cushion to the patient's body, so that the pain in their legs, which are cold and affected by the disease, will cease.
And if it is necessary to remove the first cause of the illness, you will have found the cure for their ailment.
And if you wish to apply points to the foot, then place them between the toes.
And you've placed a cushion on their thighs (or legs) to cover the area where you place a cushion on the foot, which is then covered by another cushion.
Then apply the knife to the patient's second toe, and place a cushion on their foot and elevate it.
And then there are pains in the feet that are caused by gout.
If you are treating a hernia, one should use a hot cautery to prevent complications. Apply a cushion to the wound on their body.
And when the patient's illness is completely cured, the pain in the feet will stop.
And if the pain is in the stomach, then you have to treat the whole abdomen with cautery.
Guard yourself from burning your thigh by opening the cushion and apply a cushion to that area instead.
Causing pain in the foot, which is called so by the people, is a sign of gout.
A person with gout should keep their legs elevated; if a cushion is needed for support, use one that has been made for the purpose.
On the thigh.
This vein is born from the foot, which has little redness, and is caused by a blockage of the humors in the body.
And if it's necessary to make a poultice for the other parts of the body, it's called gout.
And if a childbearing patient's belly is swollen, it is customary to say that she has sciatica.
And if the vein in the foot becomes inflamed, it is called gout.
And then you cauterize them with the lead of a hot poultice and call the resulting ailment "lead," which means it will be treated as such.
And if there is pain in the legs, you should apply cauterization to the area to prevent swelling. And if the pain is prolonged, apply a poultice to the affected area; use a poultice when you have an opening in the leg and the body is being affected by that which causes the pain.
If there are other reasons for the intestine to be painful, treat them gently and remove them from their place.
And from these other veins we must now make a cut to remove them.
And if it is necessary to treat the body's humors, put a cushion under them, and apply the hot needle to those humors in the limbs.
This vein causes pain in the foot and is also called gout.
And if a person's intestines are affected by gout, apply the following treatment:
And when it is necessary to make incisions on the skin, it is called the disease of the worms.
In some places, this disease is called "gout" because it is caused by an excess of cold humors.
And if there are many worms in the intestines, they will be known as worm infestations.
When the heat rises to the head, it's best to apply cushions to the body to prevent it from getting too hot.
And if you want to heal someone and perform surgery on their feet, use the pointed cautery.
And if the patient has a pain in the flesh that is caused by an excess of phlegm or humor in the leg, it is said to be a symptom of a bad humor within the body.
Then return the cushion to its proper place on the bedpost.
On the topic of pain caused by illness, there are others who believe it to be caused by other factors.
This disease, which is called gout in our land, can be found in other parts of the body as well.
And you have seen that which we call gout, which I will now explain to you. And I saw on her arm a living vein.
Then the pain will settle in that place, and the patient should be kept there for an hour.
And then apply a bandage to their legs after they have been treated.
And also put a cushion on each part of the body. And you have also seen other diseases in the feet. Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
And if you are not careful to apply a cautery properly, your body will be harmed by it.
And apply cauterization to those veins that are open and use them as a cushion for the patient's feet.
This is a tricky one! It's likely referring to a medical procedure.  Here comes the first
Then you have to apply another cauterization to the patient's bad humors, which are caused by the expulsion of wind from the body.
On treating gout.
Arrows are made differently for different people depending on their needs.
And when the doctor has examined the patient's body and found that they have a severe pain in their legs, and if he sees that the pain is caused by an excess of humors.
And so if you are going to be treated for the wound from which the arrow came forth, you must be careful that it is not removed.
Then put a cautery on their legs or feet.
And when the cushion has touched the lung, they will be affected by the plague.
And if an arrow pierces the foot, it is the other members of the body that are affected, causing pain even in the small bones but not in the tendons and muscles.
When there is a pain in the stomach, apply a strong poultice to the stomach and use a cushion for comfort.
The patient should be treated by a surgeon if they have an injury that requires one.
And if there be other pain in the bladder, and he be in pain in another part of his body, then he should be burned with a cautery.
Maybe the other parts of the body are affected by other types of poisons.
Then use your hand to hold down the legs of the patient, so that they are held in place.
This text refers to a medical treatise, perhaps from the Renaissance, discussing treatment for a condition in the nose, which suggests the sentence likely describes a remedy for a nasal ailment.
When the patient has a cushion under their head, they should be treated with a poultice applied to the legs, and if there is pain in the feet, a poultice should be applied to the foot to relieve it.
When a person has a bad pain in their legs, then they have a bad humors in them.
And if you have to put a hot needle on a patient's throat to draw out the pus from a wound, use a sharp needle.
And if you wish to apply a cautery to a man's suffering, he will be healed by the removal of that which was causing him pain in the belly.
And if it's necessary to remove an arrow from their back, they would be burned by the hot cautery.
And the woman has a pain in her legs, which are now swollen and inflamed.
And if there is a need for leeches to be applied, the bloodletting would be done by a designated physician.
And so that the arrow doesn't hit the bone, you should place it carefully on the man's body to avoid injury.
And you have to leave the patient alone for three days.
Then the plague was no longer felt in the legs; thus, the patient's feet were free from the other and then on the right foot.
And place a poultice on the wound to draw out the pain with an application of ointment or other remedies.
Aretz no accidic si el loc hagues to, which means the patient has got a fever.
Then, with a delicate cautery, hold your hand on the patient's feet for a few days.
And so you apply that medicinal treatment within four months.
When you are done, treat the area with hot irons to improve blood flow.
The doctors are saying that the condition should be called gout.
E tu as to understand the rules and significance of drawing blood from the patient's body
And if the patient has an unusual ailment or wound in their legs, it is called a “novel” ailment by the doctors, and they are treated with new methods for the removal of the pain from wounds.
And therefore I say that gout is caused by the cold humors being in excess in the body.
And if it is necessary to treat them, the doctors will know what to do.
Then, if you are unable to get the pain to subside for several days, it is customary to call it a gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or apply a poultice to the affected area, then cauterize it.
And if you do not see a complete cure by the way of using the other method, then use a small cautery to burn the affected area.
When the arrow is aimed at the chest, it is called a wound to the heart.
When it comes to gout, you have already opened the space where it resides, and cushion its pain.
And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the patient's legs or buttocks for their comfort during surgery, use another cushion for that purpose.
And when you are extracting an arrow from one location, use caution so as not to cause further damage or injury.
When it is necessary to leave the intestine alone for a few days, so that it can be relieved. And if you encounter resistance, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then do as you find best for your health and apply the lancet to the vein or affected area.
And so that the pain in the joints be eased by the heat. And if it's not possible to do so, you must hold their legs in place.
Gout is caused by cold blood that has gone to the feet and causes pain.
If it is necessary to treat the bone, the other should be treated in a way that corresponds to its nature.
And then burn it closed, the wound on their legs and a cushion on their chest, to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Then you apply a hot iron to it, and place the arrow's tip on their knee.
Mays if you were to apply a hot poultice to the affected area, use a heated cushion.
And if you have to apply a strong cautery, then use a cushion to protect the area from the pain.
If you are experiencing pain in the area of the metatarsus, and you have no other injuries, it is likely gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the foot or to the legs of the patient, and another poultice to their chest, then it is done in such a way that you touch those areas with your hand.
This looks like a Latin-like language, perhaps meaning:  "Form of forceps by which they are thrown back to their place or on the feet, so that the intestine does not protrude."
Then apply your knowledge to prevent them from being inflamed.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area, which is likely the foot, as it is being used by the patient.
So too if pain exists in the body, which is caused by humors, that they be treated by applying the method of drawing out the inflammation with a poultice.
And for the opening of the veins, you must make an incision.
And if there is no pulsating humor, the veins will be prepared for you to apply a cautery. And for the patient's skin to be cleansed, they are then covered by the surgeon’s hand so that his veins are not exposed to the cold.
And if there are three veins in the legs and feet, it is customary to say that the patient has a pain in the legs and feet.
The pain in the legs is often caused by the young veins.
Then you must treat the patient's head by placing a cushion on their legs and below the knees, and if they are experiencing pain in the areas where there are cushions under them, it means that they have a condition called a "headache" by doctors.
Then you apply the spoon to the cavity below the knee. And then elevate the patient's hand to feel his pulse. And let the patient's leg be placed on the two-finger rule for the duration of the treatment.
And if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, it is done with a cautery tool.
And that's already the beginning of the book, the opening of the intestine, for humors and another for the patient's feet and legs.
When pain is in the feet, it is called gout by doctors.
You are referring to something that is hidden within the body, but you can see them clearly, which is how you would know if it is gout.
When the joints are affected by such pain, apply cautery to the affected area, and if the pain is in the veins, apply hot cautery to the affected vein and cold cautery to the rest of the body.
And then place a cushion under the legs of the person who has the pain and let them rest for an hour.
And so it is that the remembrance of their illness comes to mind, and they are given aid to prevent them from being attracted by the disease.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the front of the body by drawing blood, then you should use a heated instrument for that purpose.
And the quality of the patient's bandage is dependent on the nature of the wound, which you must ensure is understood before applying a cushion; and when it comes to the patient's foot, use another bandage for the rest of the body.
Then apply a hot cautery to the head or other affected area.
And some uses for it are described as being of a lesser degree than the others, which are caused by a severe pain.
And if the patient has scabies on their face or feet, they are to be treated in those areas.
The quality of the bandage was good, and it was tied to his legs, and he was placed under a bandage.
Then apply the cauterization to the vein on their arms.
And apply a cautery to the affected limb, and place another one on their foot for a night.
And may the first pulse on the nose vein be used to treat fevers, but only if the patient has a cushion.
And if the patient's illness is due to cold humors in the body, especially in the legs and feet, then apply a hot compress to the affected areas.
Cove that you place your hand on the area to make sure the blood flow is restricted if there is a need to treat the pain in the foot.
Mays le serve the patient's legs and arms, and place your hand on the affected area to prevent further complications.
Then the nature of their ailment on the legs will be apparent.
And the bloodletting should be done gradually from below, on the body's lower parts, as well as the amount of bloodletting, which depends on the patient's condition.
And then apply a bandage to the legs, and treat the patient's illness with care.
And if they have an opening in their legs or veins due to surgery, you will see a cushion on the patient's leg and another on their chest for the purpose of applying pressure.
The type of pain that comes from the small veins on the side of the body where the blood vessels are located.
If there is doubt about which humor causes a particular ailment, you should understand that it is a hidden cause.
And if you are dealing with veins in their feet, they have already been treated by another.
If the patient's body suffers from another vein opening, they should be treated for the disease.
And the quality of their pain is that it is sharp and intense in the affected part.
Then answer the following questions to ensure proper healing.
And they apply heat to the area so that the blood is thinned, and the patient’s skin is cleansed by fire.
And apply heat to the affected joint, but avoid opening the veins (of the body) because they are not good for you.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place a cushion on their chest and for this purpose.
Mays le (the first person to use cauterization on the patient's arm should be called a "basilisk" if they are treating their foot pain by using a cautery on the veins of the foot.
And if you are skilled in setting bones, it will be necessary to cauterize the bone-setter's hands so that he doesn't harm the patient.
And if the condition is not a complication of the bowels, then we know it’s not an actual “complication of gout.”
The bloodletting should be done on the leg, but only when there are cold humors present.
Then, if the leg has been opened by cauterization, that's where the inflammation is located, otherwise it's on the thigh.
And if you see blood flowing from the incision, apply a bandage to stop it.
And if you see the pain persist for several days in the feet, it is advisable to apply a cautery to the affected area.
When the pain is caused by an ailment, you must apply cauterization to their veins if they are present.
Then apply cauterization to that area, unless it's necessary to do so on the bone itself.
And the pain from the legs is difficult in the early stages of the disease, but a cushion can be used on the legs to relieve pain.
This text describes using cushions to treat a patient with pain in the area where the basilica and cephalica veins are located.
And if there are blood clots already in the legs, it will be difficult to cure them with another cautery.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion on their thighs, and another one on the patient's leg.
Et vos, leeches, you must cut the vein on their feet in order to treat the illness of the person.
> And if the pain is in the foot, it is customary to call it gout; otherwise, use a cauterizer.
When joints are inflamed, apply cold compresses to reduce swelling.
Le primier (first) refers to the first vein being cut, basilica (the one to be cut in the treatment), basilica (the vein in the foot) es a (is)
Then let the patient be given three days of rest, after which a poultice should be applied to the foot.
And if a vein needs to be opened, it's done on both day and night, whenever necessary.
And so the cushion must be placed on the patient's legs for three months, not fourteen.
And if you have a pain in the foot or gout, put a cushion on his legs, and another to stop the patient's hands from being affected by the pain.
And if a patient has a disease that affects the stomach or limbs, it causes pain in the body, but also the following symptoms.
Then consider applying a hot poultice to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to do an operation on the foot, you should use a subtle approach.
So perform bloodletting on them, for the patient's sake: if necessary to open the veins in the foot.
And if you need to apply a cautery to an animal, place it carefully so as not to cause further injury.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, and for the foot to be treated with a balm or other soothing remedies.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use another method on the affected area.
Then apply a bandage to the arm of the patient, and a cauterizing tool to their body twice or thrice.
And if there is a stricture in the leg, it is treated by cauterization to prevent the blood from flowing out.
And if you are going to make an incision on the foot, please note that it is necessary.
And if it is necessary to perform bloodletting on a patient, first cleanse the area around the vein below the knee.
Therefore, let's translate "Cove·l" as "the fleu" (meaning "the surgeon" in this context).
And if the condition persists, you should apply another type of treatment.
And if you are forced to leave, and if the patient is suffering, then use a cushion on their legs or feet.
Then apply bloodletting if the patient needs it, and another place a cushion on their legs, and hold the other's hands to prevent them from being cut.
And if it is necessary to open the space between the legs, you must have a cushion placed under them.
When there's a need to burn away excess humors, it is treated by applying a hot poultice; now apply a cold compress to the affected area. And for this place, it's better to use oil and another servant would use their hand.
And so they should also be forbidden to use it on veins.
The patient's intestines are swollen and inflamed, and must be treated with a poultice.
And if you have to apply heat to that vein, then do so by using cautery.
And if you wish to stop the pain, use the cushion and rest for a few days.
The basilica will be treated with bloodletting.
And then place a cautery on the affected area to draw out the humors that cause pain.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area to help it heal.
And it is fitting that you should burn the affected area with a hot iron, and apply your hand to prevent gout.
And if you apply heat to the body's humors, then you should use a heated object on the affected area.
And if there is an accumulation of fluids in the body, they should be treated with a bloodletting from the vein.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use a sharp instrument to make cuts on the affected area, which must be kept clean.
And if it is necessary to let blood through vein incision instead of venesection, it is best for them to be called by their proper name, which is the practice of phlebotomy.
This practice is also known as "letting blood" or "phlebotomy".
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from being affected by the pain.
Then apply cautery to the affected area on the patient's body, using a poultice of myrrh or another spice-infused substance.
Then you must apply a bloodletting to the patient's legs if they have a wound.
And use (it) in case of other causes that cause fainting.
And so the patient's blood will be drained from the veins, and the bloodletting done gently.
Mays the one who performs surgery on the arm use a tourniquet (tourniquet) for bleeding.
When there's a pain in the patient's legs or feet, they are given a treatment on the second or third day.
Mays you should cauterize the area where the blood was drawn from.
And if you are going to bleed the patient, don't let them bleed too much because they will die.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins, use the tool called a cautery to remove the excess blood that causes swelling in the ankles.
When the vein is inflamed, they should be treated as if they were inflamed.
Then apply the other instrument to prevent them from evacuating the other arm through another vein.
And then you cauterize the brachial artery.
And if bloodletting is necessary, it should be done carefully, avoiding the veins that are near the surface and prone to bleeding.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, use a small cautery;
The patient's legs are wide apart.
E another man’s hand should be placed on his hands to apply warmth and let the blood flow freely.
When winter comes it is advisable to use warm cautery instead of the cold type.
And if you want to treat something that is not properly a disease, but rather a condition, it is customary for physicians to cauterize the vein in the foot.
Evisceration of the liver is on the right side.
And its purpose is to treat the body's humors by making an incision to release them.
And if you are willing to heal the pain in your legs, then apply a poultice with a hot coal.
And apply a poultice to the legs to prevent the blood from flowing there.
And similarly, if the pain is in the feet, it is called gout.
And if the left side of the body is affected by the condition of the spleen.
And for bloodletting, you would place a cushion on their legs, another under their head, and have them hold their hands.
And if it is necessary to perform bloodletting, apply it as usual.
So if it is necessary to treat the swelling of the veins or those on their legs, use warm water to bring out the pain in the foot, which you can apply a poultice to reduce.
And so the body's humors are balanced by applying heat to the affected area.
When you need to cut into the flesh above a patient's ankle, then it is necessary to cauterize the area.
And if there's bloodletting, then place a cushion under their legs, and another on their chest.
Then you must place your hand on the wound to apply a cauterization.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first cautery, they will place a cushion under them, and another on their legs, and a third above the affected limb.
And if it is a wound on the foot, they are to be treated similarly.
E then comes the pain in the sciatic vein, which is the foot and ankle are affected by it.
Then use a cushion to apply pressure to their chest during the procedure.
And the nature of pain in the bones, which is known as the gout, is such that the patient should be treated gently by the physician.
Therefore, when the patient's legs are treated with hot cautery in the direction of the abdomen, it is called gout.
And if the patient's foot becomes inflamed, they should be treated with a cautery to prevent the disease from spreading further.
And so that the nerves are not disturbed, allow the blood to flow freely.
Then apply a poultice to the area where the blood will flow from the cut.
This refers to the use of remedies for flatulence using a poultice or cautery on specific areas.
And for corns, you need another cushion.
There are two ways to apply cauterization: one with a heated iron, and the other with fire.
And if you want to make a cut, use fire for that purpose.
And if there are no wounds on the patient's body, then don’t use a cushion and apply pressure to stop the pain in their feet.
Then apply cauterization to the veins only where the blood flows freely, such as on the feet, but not to those requiring cautery for their affliction.
Gently cauterize the area where the pain occurs in the legs or feet.
Therefore, when you apply it to the patient's legs, it should be done in such a way that le tertz or third of the body is treated.
And if the pain is in the neck, apply a poultice.
This pain in the legs is treated by means of a bloodletting.
And if you apply cold compresses to the body, it will be necessary to use leeches on the patient's legs.
And if you need to use cautery on the patient, it should be done carefully, as pain in that area can be severe.
And if it is necessary to use cupping on the patient, I advise you to place a cushion under them.
This treatment involves applying heat to the legs to prevent swelling, and using a lancet to draw blood from the patient's hand.
And if you are a physician, use heat to treat the ailment.
This is a reference to treating ailments related to humors in the body's extremities.
And command the cauterizer to use a small cushion on his legs and another under their feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the gums, use a cushion to protect their teeth from pain.
And apply cauterization to the two sides of the body for the pain in the legs and feet of the patient, which is what is meant by “le capitan” (the head)
When it is a case of bloodletting, they should be applied to the three largest veins.
And command the cautery man to make a mark on the patient's body.
And hold a cupping glass on their buttocks to create a draw for the patient's legs and apply heat to the other parts of the body.
When there are many inflammations in the body, some for the benefit of the stomach, others for the benefit of the joints.
This refers to gout affecting the legs.
For in the body are already weakened, causing fainting.
And they will have pain on their legs because of the infiltration of humors.
And if you place a cushion over the legs, use the other for less intense treatment, and only apply a cauterization briefly. Then apply pressure to prevent the intestines from becoming inflamed if there are sores or signs of inflammation.
And then you should scrape the surface of the body in stages, and another their arm, and yet another on the foot to consider the other's disposition.
When a man suffers from gout, he must be treated by a specialist.
And tell the attendant to make the incisions deeper, or else the patient will be in pain.
And if there is a need for bloodletting in the first session, use a cushion to apply pressure to the veins so the blood is drawn from the vein, not the artery. And if you have to make a second incision on the legs, place another cushion under them.
If you have a wound in your foot, apply a cauterizing agent to their legs.
And then apply a cautery to the vein in the leg, little by little.
And if we want to draw out the bloodletting, you need to use the lancet on them.
And you're looking at just one part of the body to see if it needs to be opened up further.
When a patient has thick skin, they should use a cushion with a different type of oil for treatment, depending on whether the patient's condition is mild or severe.
And if it's the other way around, use a cushion to elevate it.
If you wish to make your meaning clear, use the term "gout" when referring to pain in the joints caused by cold humors.
If it is a cushion or other object placed on the legs of a patient, they are likely suffering from a condition called gout.
And for those patients whose illness is caused by excess fluids, use cooling herbs or chamomile to reduce inflammation.
If the patient has a cushion for their leg, then apply the treatment to the limb affected by gout.
And the poultice must be applied before the cautery is used.
At the beginning, let's see if the patient has an excess of hot humors: if they do, he should be treated with cold treatments.
Then apply heat to the legs, as if you're treating them for pain.
And if a patient has pain in their feet or legs, they should be given a cushion to reduce pressure on those parts.
And if the patient has a fever that requires bloodletting to treat.
E beure that a certain man or men will drink some medicine, which they are given for the sake of their health, so preemptively prepare a potion to soothe the pain, and then place the patient's legs in a position of comfort.
If you cauterize the liver, it will be called gout, or perhaps you should say that the pain afflicts the liver, but in truth, it is a burning pain in the limbs.
And if you apply a tourniquet to the patient’s leg, it is said that they are suffering from the effects of bloodletting.
And then you can place a cushion on their legs so that they don't move.
E semblantment fa means "And if it is necessary to do" in Catalan.
And these cupping treatments are only performed with cups and with suctioning; not with fire.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area to treat the patient's illness.
The patient should have their legs and intestines treated with heat or warmth.
Forma de ventoza es un palu d'allotja e la cushion, which is used to treat ailments in the foot, is often used for a variety of purposes by doctors.
Then place a cushion under their arms and another on their legs so that they do not feel pain.
And if it is to be cauterized, it should be done transversely with a heated iron.
And if it is a severe case of cold humors affecting the patient's foot, use cautery on them.
And place a cushion on their legs, for they are the ones who are affected by the other's pain.
And if it is necessary to use heat on the patient's body, they should be burned with fire from wood.
Then apply cupping therapy to the patient's body, placing them on the legs as needed.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, do so according to the method of the doctor, and you have done well.
Then return your hand to the patient's thighs.
This is the way to treat those who suffer from a lot of pain, and another way to treat them for a little while.
Capitol .xcvii:  The patient's limbs are now being supported by other means.
Gout was treated by applying something to your feet.
Then apply a leech to their clean legs, for they are in need of it.
Then if you want to treat the intestine and other symptoms.
Then if there is no other cause for the pain in their legs, they are considered to be suffering from gout.
And if there's no other way to heal it, they should be treated with a cautery.
Then, if necessary, use a heated cloth to treat the area where the patient's intestines are affected.
And if the patient has a fever due to a prolonged illness.
When blood is thick, or if there are other diseases in the body, then it is called a trissat.
And if bloodletting is necessary, use leeches.
And so if the blood vessels are opened up, they will be able to apply a cushion to their recent injury.
And when you wish to cauterize, cauterize immediately.
And thus begins the treatment of gout for the third time in the same area. This chapter is about fractures, which are often encountered in the practice of medicine.
Oh, son, know that doctors are accustomed to calling these things which can be cured by hot irons or cold humors
And if one wants to prevent an understanding of the text from being forgotten, they should use these writings, which are written for those who are learned, and others should be careful not to touch them.
And if a patient has pain in the leg, they are opening their bowels.
Then I have shown you how to treat the other parts of the body as well.
The first part of a text is given to us as "Capitol primier".
And another upon the foot, to apply cauterization to the legs if necessary. When translating "Cove donc" to English, we must be careful about the context, as medieval languages often have subtle variations in meaning depending on the source.  This phrase can mean:
Then use a sharp instrument to treat them, but be careful because if the wound is on a joint, you should be mindful of the patient's condition.
And if you have a cushion on the patient's legs and are concerned about excess blood in their limbs, you should apply heat to the body to bring the warmth to the affected area.
And then the patient should be returned to their proper place in the ranks, for which they are to be treated accordingly.
And if a cushion between the legs is used to reduce pain.
Then treat the patient's bones, which are in the first place, with the use of cushions for the body.
The intestines of the sick person are affected by the cold, so too will they be treated.
And thus it is necessary to place a cushion on the limbs of the patient, as we have already said.
When you know the cause of the pain, apply a hot cushion to the affected area.
And I have seen the patient's leg in its own chapter, but only for those who have no experience.
Mota's work will be done by another, as they are unable to do it themselves. E so the intestine or gouty body has been given the name of another, but the doctor will use a different term for it.
And if it's a pain in the intestine, a special cautery is used to treat it.
And then treat it with the appropriate remedies. The patient's pain from the bone being exposed to the cold and a physician can treat a fracture by returning the displaced part to its proper position and using a cushion for support.
Therefore, when there is no apparent joint pain or inflammation, you can know that the ailment is not a fracture.
If there is pain in the joints, it is possible that it is a case of twisted humors or gout.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's ailment, then treat them with a cushion for support.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the first stage of an infected wound on the leg, apply a poultice for several days until the swelling subsides.
And if the pain in the bone is lessened by its occurrence, then one should apply cauterization carefully.
Then apply the second to their legs, if necessary.
If a bone has pain, the use of bandages may be necessary for a broken leg or foot.
And let the patient be cauterized in the position where you must place your hand on their legs to return the pain to its natural state.
And so be careful to only apply pressure on your body's joints where necessary, and use a cushion for comfort when using the hot cautery method.
Then you will see that he has his hands on their proper place.
Then apply a strong cauterization to the affected area, as many doctors would do for gout.
The quality of the pain in the leg, if it's from the cold stricture, is what you should treat with a cushion and another person's help.
And for those that are small on the arms and legs, apply bandages to their chest, to prevent them from being burned.
Then you have opened the way for a cure for those who suffer from such ailments in their feet, but there are no complications.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs or feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
And if the joint pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to cauterize the affected part. Then gently warm the area of the injury little by little.
Then take a bandage and wrap the injured area to prevent further injury.
Then you must examine the patient's body to determine the cause of the pain.
Then you will apply the poultice to the area of the wound.
And be that they are formed from the wood of palm trees or reeds;
Then apply a splint to the patient's legs, applying a bandage to secure them.
The patient's legs should be positioned so that the cushion rests on them.
And then, you have to place two cushions under each finger.
Then apply to the legs a cushion or another instrument used for cauterization.
Then place your hand on their chest to remember them.
You see, for seven days you will use the cushion on the joints.
This sentence seems to describe a method used by ancient healers ("Antics") for treating injuries using a poultice ("emplaustres") applied to the legs or body ("mas les quals"). It likely refers to a specific treatment for gout.
And so, to prevent pain from the flour getting into the patient's hands, a special poultice is used.
And if you have to treat a patient, apply hot cautery to the affected area.
This is a cushion should be placed between the legs of the patient, which is a type of bandage. Use this remedy when the pain in the foot is caused by the body's humors being out of balance and apply it to the affected area.
This translates to:
Then apply the cushion to the legs and feet as needed.
And if you are a physician, take care to apply a cushion to their legs when using a heated iron.
Then apply the poultice to the rest of the body, and treat the area with the use of a cautery, if necessary.
Other methods are used to restore it if it is necessary to operate on them.
Take 1 part of mallow root, 1 part of comfrey root, and 1 part of chamomile flower, and make a poultice with wine: use these herbs to treat the pain in the legs and feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize their wound, use it on the legs or feet.
The pain is soothed by a poultice made from lilly of the valley, chamomile, balm, and other herbs.
This sentence refers to the treatment of a wound in the patient's foot and mentions the use of bandages and splints for proper healing.
This practice, called "setting" the broken part by the doctor's instructions.
And may be applied to reduce swelling.
When the pain occurs in the legs and feet, the cushion should be placed on the patient's body to ensure that they are not harmed, but rather cared for, so as to avoid injury and allow the healing process to occur over time. Then if there is pain in the foot or leg, apply a cautery to it.
And apply a cushion to the leg and let them be treated with seawater and vinegar, and keep the leg submerged in warm water for an hour, then let the patient rest for one hour after applying the cushion to the leg, and let the vinegar be applied to the affected area.
And he placed his hand on the patient's abdomen to apply a poultice.
Then you should apply cautery to the affected area to prevent the inflammation from worsening.
When the joint is treated with cautery, it should be done carefully for it's necessary to understand the cause before proceeding.
E altre ma lesqu'ayssat le malaute e segon que es rememberes el seu use.
This Latin-like sentence translates to: "And if you want to nourish the patient's broken leg, they should be prevented from being affected by the injury."
The above text translates to: When the doctors are unable to heal the patient's pain, they will be called "tortuous healers" or something similar.
For I have seen that you have not done as the doctors do.
Of all the cases, this one is particularly difficult to deal with.
Various types of fractures are caused by blows to the body.
And the pain that comes from these ailments can be treated with hot or cold cautery to the affected area, and another treatment for those who are not in such a state.
And this fracture is caused by another pain, and another on their feet, which can be severe or mild.
The bone has fractured in such a way that it is broken but the fragments are still in place.
And if there's a fracture to the leg or foot, that's when it's already been broken by the bone in their joints.
Then apply the treatment to the patient's body as if they were a child.
And if there are fractures in the bones of the foot, that's what they call it, but only if the patient has gout. And bring the medicine to the patient's legs, and hold it there.
And a cushion is placed under their legs to prevent them from moving.
And so, if it's a specific type of pain, it is known to be treated by applying a cushion to the legs and treating the fracture.
Then if they have pain in the legs, we must consider their health at the beginning, its severity and the reason for the ailment, to see if it's a sign of something serious.
And if the ailment is not an acute injury, you hope to cure it through this method.
In such a case, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
If you place a cushion under your hands, it will be easier to keep the patient warm and comfortable.
If the intestine has suffered a small injury, apply a cautery to the area affected by the pain.
And if you have to apply cautery, it should be done carefully according to the nature of the pain.
And if you encounter the patient's intestines swelling, apply a poultice to them, and place cushions on their body, so that the cushion prevents the swelling from spreading.
And there are two types of operation.
Then apply another incision to the bones of the leg; this is how you do it for the legs.
And apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and another to their feet.
And therefore it is necessary to know how much pain they are experiencing in their limbs, so that if there are any signs of an acute attack, we can treat them accordingly.
And if there is pain in the legs, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if the bone is strong, they are called to be treated with a hot cautery.
This is a command that means to apply heat to the area around the ankles and feet but to avoid applying it directly to the bone, as it would cause pain to the person if they were to be burned.
And it is convenient that you burn a cautery on the leg where there are many joints to treat the patient, for whom the treatment is with a hot cautery.
Then carefully measure the amount of pain in the affected area's bones and place a cushion under them.
And if the pain is caused by something other than a joint, use a cautery to remove that which is causing it, and as you have learned, carefully cut with a cauttery for a small incision.
And so that you have to be careful that the fire-maker does not touch the rest of the body.
And if it is necessary to treat them in the bone, they will need the best tools for the task.
You have already opened the first part of the intestine, and you'll need to use a tool to help with that.
And if it is a lighter injury, you must use a different approach for leugeres, one that requires more detail than just saying “fractures”
Then return the intestine to its place with a hot cautery, as the lentil-like pain affects the intestines and is caused by humors accumulating in their joints, which is why they are treated with a hot cauterization.
And then place a cushion under the foot so that it does not swell further.
When there is a cushion, apply it to the affected area; if it is necessary for the patient to be treated by an expert in the treatment of diseases with a hot cautery, then it should be applied to the legs.
When a bone is fractured, it will be necessary to cauterize the wound and treat it with other treatments that are appropriate.
And you must use a lancet to lance the patient's body, and apply a poultice if necessary.
In smaller injuries, it is customary for the surgeon to apply proper treatment.
And it is an art that causes pain in the affected area. And place a cushion on their legs.
When pain occurs in your hand, you should use a cushion.
And lay the patient down on their back for one or two days if necessary to prevent further complications.
Then use a cushion for the plague wound to be healed, and administer medicines that are suitable for treating such diseases.
And when a person is sick with the plague, you must apply a poultice to the patient's head.
E donc is necssesary to modify the pain in the foot.
Then apply a cloth soaked in that which will heal the patient, applying it to the affected area.
E if you have already been diagnosed with a condition that affects the foot, and it is customary to call this type of pain,
When the nose is broken.
Know that the foot is not to be broken, but treated as if it were in need of points, and another cushion on the feet.
If the bone in the leg is broken, it's good practice to put something in place to stabilize the fracture. And if the patient suffers from pain in their legs, which will make it difficult to perform the operation on them.
And if the doctor says it's a fracture, you know there are other treatments needed for that part of the body.
Then make the two parts look like they are in the same place.
And then apply a cushion to their feet; if necessary, use a hot iron for the treatment.
E if you're using the provided information, you would only be able to use a cushion for the first two phrases are referring to the same thing - the location of the pain.
And so the old man's body is warmed by applying a cushion to his legs.
And sometimes the septum is inflamed with polyps, which are covered in cloth by the physician.
And this cause, if you wish to use it, is treated by applying a cautery.
And if they are afflicted by a boil, they can use a cautery to open the boil in the second place.
If there is inflammation in the legs or feet, apply poultice to the affected area.
When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate the joints, apply a cushion to the area and treat it accordingly.
Then apply heat to the nostrils, a cushion to the nose, and a poultice to the head, so that the patient's nose should be protected from injury.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is broken.
"The jawbone should be treated differently from other bones, some being treated for the bone itself and others for pain in the mandible."
So if the fracture is on the left side, then you should apply pressure to the wound with your left hand and push it back in;
Then you must make sure to apply it to the entire body.
And you have already applied the remedy to their teeth so that the bandage wouldn't worsen the condition by putting pressure on a broken tooth.
And you must know that the patient who has gout, they are in need of rest and calm.
And if you need to rectify anything that has been done on the patient's body, then apply wool or other such material to their legs and keep the affected area covered.
Then, when it's been set right, place another bandage on the injury, and leave it alone for three weeks, if the fracture has not healed yet.
And then if the foot becomes inflamed, cauterize it repeatedly until the disease is cured, and then apply a poultice to the area where the inflammation was.
And if the fracture is in a joint, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you make a cut to let out the bad humors from the leg, it's good practice to also use a cushion on their body.
Then apply the paste to those areas, and when the plague has been removed, place a bandage on them.
Chapter 5.
This refers to the treatment of a dislocated bone.
This refers to a medical procedure, and there are three ways this can be done.
And if a bone in the leg has been injured, or a joint in the foot has been strained, then you should use these methods.
And if the bone is broken in that place, he would be healed by two ministers, one who holds the part where the pain is located, and the other who holds his legs.
And then they place your hand on the thigh, where the injury is located.
And if a cushion is needed for the patient's foot, another cushion should be placed on their thighs.
And if you cannot apply cautery to the patient's body, then put them in a comfortable position for the treatment, making sure the cushion is placed under their thighs.
And you press on the patient's clavicle (collarbone) while a doctor straightens the bone, and the patient's shoulder blade while you have the patient lie down.
And if you want to cure someone of gout, apply your hands to their feet.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the intestines, place another cushion under them; and if it is on the legs or feet, then hold your hand above the area to prevent the pain from spreading.
And if you have a cushion, place it on their lap, and if they are in pain, apply it to the affected area.
Mays the pain of the patient be relieved by your hand.
And if you are dealing with a plague, adjust the skin flap.
And if there's little disruption, you have to use a cushion for the wound.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area for the cure of the inflammation.
And so, if the legs are not broken, you must be careful that the patient does not get hurt.
And if there is pain in the legs and feet, use a cushion to support the body and prevent them from falling out.
And if there's pain in the feet, don't call it gout, but instead treat it as a general ailment.
And apply a cushion to their body above the knees if they have already been treated for a while, and let them be in place.
And it is possible to soothe the pain in 28 days, even if it takes longer.
The text you provided appears to be from a medical treatise written in Old French, but with some spelling variations.
The treatment of a shoulder dislocation.
The spatula is broken in the place where the patient's foot is.
And so when the patient's leg has been broken - and they are already known to be a person who has a cushion under their leg, and another on their other limbs, then it is customary to say that the location of the injury is...
Then use a molinet to apply a poultice of fine linen to the affected area for a short time.
If the patient has gout, then the pain will be in the joints, not just the foot.
Then hold the patient's body in a way that prevents the cushion from falling out.
And consider the foot in its entirety, if the patient’s intestines are softened, you should apply leeches to the legs.
Then let the patient's intestines be covered.
E.g., E.g., The patient's condition should be improved within XX days or less.
And then when the time comes, the patient will know if they have gout.
And if you must treat a patient's foot, use a cushion to place under them, but be careful not to cause harm.
Chapter 7
Of the restoration of the foot's health.
The foot has been treated with another method.
Then put on a cushion in the place of the affected joints, because when they are broken, it causes pain.
E.g.,  "And in the same way, if the patient has a cough, it is important to consult with a doctor."
Apply a poultice made of wool, flax, or similar material to the affected area on the body, but if the pain is in the foot, use a special type of bandage.
When the cold humors cause pain in the patient's legs, it is customary to call it by the name of a specific joint condition, such as gout.
Chapter 8.
And for the restoration of the coasts when they are injured.
The pain caused by gout is known to affect the joints of the body, but also other parts. The doctors will use their knowledge to treat the pain in the patient's legs.
And apply a bandage to the patient's legs, a cushion under them.
And then place a cushion under their back, and the doctors are divided on how to treat it, but they say that it should be treated as if they were treating a wound.
And so the doctors will be able to tell if the pain is caused by what they are about to put their hands on.
Gout is treated by applying remedies to the affected area.
And if it is a severe case of gout, it is necessary to apply cautery to their feet.
When doctors fear that they have made an incision and the patient's bowels or other organs are affected by their illness.
Then place your hand on the patient's body to prevent them from being in pain.
And if there are other servants on their feet, they will be able to help you.
And then apply a poultice to the patient's foot, and if necessary, use another cushion on their legs.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, et autre.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the body, another method will be used.
This is the ninth chapter.
This refers to placing a cushion under the body of someone with an injury.
And if it is necessary to treat a fracture in the body, do so with a cautery. And when the patient's legs are swollen, they are usually treated with cautery.
And if you have pain in the joints and the rest of the body from a cold humor, then you should know that doctors call it gout when the pain is located in the joints.
And if you want to know if he will be cured or not, then consider his legs.
This is a translation of the first sentence: When the body is weak, a physician may apply cautery to the affected area.
And if it's not caused by one of those causes, it's better and lighter to apply the cushion.
And if you cauterize a few veins in their legs, it's a treatment for whatever the illness is.
And apply compresses to the affected area, and treat it as needed.
If there are humors in the foot that cause pain, then you will need to apply a cushion or another method to treat them, as the patient's health deteriorates.
When a bone is broken, you should place your hand on the area under the knee and apply heat to the area where the cushion is placed to soothe the pain.
And if you feel pain in your legs, apply the cushion to that area where the pain is felt, which will then heal the foot.
Chapter 10
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, which is the foot.
And if the humor in the limbs is bad, you should use a cushion to support the patient's body and apply it to their legs when setting up for treatment.
Then you apply your hand to the patient's legs and feet.
When it comes to your feet, apply a cushion to their pain.
Then apply the bandage to the other parts of the body. E thus the patient will have the space between their legs warmed, and the pain in the feet will be relieved by another poultice being placed there.
The patient will be burned in the face or chest to cauterize them.
From the provided context, it seems likely the text discusses some form of medical treatment involving applying heat to a specific area.
Then treat the pain as you would treat a wound in the foot.
The following are possible translations for the provided Latin-like phrases:
This is a complex medical text that requires specialized knowledge to translate accurately.
And then you should put a cushion under their shoulder.
Then you restore the body by using two methods, one for the intestines, and another for the legs.
Two extremities should be placed on the patient's legs during treatment.
And if the patient's body has been affected by illness, then apply a cushion under the leg that is ill.
And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to a serious illness, the doctor should place his hand on the affected area.
And if a wound has been made on the body, one way to treat it is to apply heat, which is done by using a cautery to the affected area, or by placing a cushion on their legs and putting their hands over the other two.
And if you want to treat a patient's joint pain, use a hot cautery on their legs and other body parts.
And if a fracture occurs near the muscle, then place a cushion on the side of the leg.
Then, if the injury is in the leg, they are placed on their body, placing a cushion on the injured limb and the other on the foot.
Then apply a poultice on the joint to draw out the pain.
This sounds like a recipe for treating an abscess, using wine and rosemary oil as remedies.
A hot poultice should be applied to the affected joint area to reduce swelling and pain.
And you have to hold the patient's arms to keep them from being harmed.
You will need to use a hot iron on their legs.
And you must place another cushion upon their foot and apply pressure.
And then use force to hold the intestine in place, as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And if it's necessary to place your hand on the affected area, it means the intestines are injured. And when pus gathers in the joint, apply remedies to the affected area.
Then if you are experiencing a pain in the foot, then do so using a cushion under their legs, another to hold them in place, and another as needed.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if they are in pain for three days, then you should consider it as a sign of excess of humors.
Mays three days must pass before you can release the patient from the cushion.
And so if there are other injuries, they should be treated according to their nature.
And you should consider that the body's humors are unbalanced.
And then place a cushion under the feet of the patient.
Here comes the translation:
And if the fracture is severe, it may take several months for it to heal fully.
Another person's leg will be placed at the legs of the patient.
Then apply a bandage to the arm.
Two bones are being composed by two of the doctor's assistants to be called the two parts of the body, and the other bones are being placed on the legs.
And so, using force, you will cauterize the larger bowel, or rather, the smaller bowel, but place a cushion under them.
The doctors will be pleased to hear that the patient's health has improved.
And when the tendon is broken, it is difficult to heal.
And two bones are already placed on their legs.
Therefore, if it is the case that the intestine is affected, apply a cushion to the area to prevent further injury.
When the fire is in the center of your body, you must apply strong cauterization.
And if the two are together, they are to be pressed harder.
And if you are going to cauterize a patient's body, place a cushion on their arms and legs.
And if the patient's foot has been opened to prevent the pain from spreading.
And another person holds their feet to prevent them from moving.
And place the bones back into the best possible position.
And if your body is well-formed and strong, you are not subject to gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice or other treatment to the intestines, put your hand on their legs, to prevent them from being affected by the disease.
Therefore, if the wound is in one leg only, it is treated with a poultice or salve.
For the first cushion for a person who has an abscess, apply it to the affected area as soon as possible.
And so you know, you should understand that the number of stars in the sky is seen to be the same as the patient's body.
And if it's necessary to make a bandage on the patient's body parts, place it after the opening of the leg in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the sheets that are being used be soft and smooth so as to avoid rough handling.
And consider the member who is near the patient's feet. And if a joint becomes inflamed, it is customary for physicians to call it "gout."
And let the cushion be placed on the legs.
Here comes the first line: Translation 1:  The patient must be treated with a hot cautery.
Then, consider if it is necessary to apply a hot poultice to the affected area, as the patient will be in pain when the disease is severe.
Mays is an illness that we have already discussed.
And you should hold the patient's leg in place while they are being treated.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization for a few weeks, you can use a hot iron to treat them.
This chapter discusses the placement of your hand on the patient's body for treatment purposes.
And if necessary, make sure to treat the pain in the hand and fingers.
Know that the foot is treated as a separate entity from the rest of the body.
And if the patient's intestines are affected by the illness, apply your hand on the affected area to prevent further damage.
Then the patient's foot should be treated with a cushion.
Then apply a poultice and bandages to the affected area; if you wish to use a cushion and fire.
When the wound is severe, one should be careful to avoid burning the skin of the patient's legs or elsewhere.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, they must be lifted by another person and the cushion should be placed on their legs or the area being cauterized.
Then if the bone is broken in a limb, you have already made it so that the patient's leg is positioned so that the fracture is exposed to the air.
And if there is a fracture in the legs or other parts, then you should use a cautery to cauterize the wound.
Mays es que la cosa es en la junctura de lu, then you should apply a cushion to the other parts.
E consider the location of the wound for treatment.
In the past, it was common for doctors to use the term "gout" for any condition causing joint pain.
De costuma, when the cavity of the body is open to the hernia-prone areas, then apply your knowledge to restore the health of the bone.
The bones are broken by the cold in a person's legs, which the other servant declares.
The patient's condition is called “gout” when they have pain in their joints due to an excess of cold humors.
And if he has a good diagnosis of the fracture, place the bone back in its proper location by means of a heated tool.
When the doctors need to treat their patient's ailments, they use cushions to prevent hot poultices from burning them.
And if the patient has a hernia, it is necessary to apply them immediately.
And when the doctor has placed a cushion on the patient's legs to restrain them from further pain. This is about the treatment of an abscess, which is also known as a boil, on the legs.
Then apply a bandage to their legs, and place a cushion under them.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
Then place a splint on their leg to prevent further injury.
And if it is necessary to make a cauterization, apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply a bandage to the leg, applying pressure to the injured area.
Then place two cushions on their legs to ensure the patient's legs are supported.
And for the patient's hands, apply bandages to them.
Then you should use heat to treat the patient’s bone, and apply cold treatment as needed.
Perhaps he needs to be restrained during treatment.
"In such cases, it is restored by means of the cushion; therefore, it is necessary to treat the legs."
And if a man has suffered from them for forty days or more, he will be a good candidate to receive cauterization.
Chapter 15.
This refers to restoring the intestine or using a cauterizer.
This is where the patient's legs are swollen, they are likely suffering from a painful ailment.
Then apply cautery to the affected area, if there's a need for it.
And then you should apply remedies to the affected area in the following manner: if the foot is swollen, apply a poultice; if it is necessary for the patient to be treated with moxas, those which are applied.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area on the cushion.
Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs, as the physician has suggested for such cases.
Chapter 16.
And then treat the fracture in the leg.
Then a doctor should know that the foot was burned or a heated tool was used on the patient's leg and foot, which is called gout by doctors.
And thus, you have two options for treatment: apply to the legs and use the other methods on the rest of the body.
And if one bone is broken, the other bones are affected by it.
And if there is a need for it, the bone will be split apart.
And if there are broken bones, it is necessary to be careful with them.
And then put your hand on the area where the pain occurs, and apply it to the cushion or cloth for the patient's legs.
But if the break in the leg is open, it heals by stopping the movement of your legs.
And to the foot you will apply the appropriate treatment for gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, place two cushions, one on each side of the patient's foot.
And place a cushion on both legs, three places in total, and the other, the doctor puts his hand on the patient's feet, and the patient must remain still to prevent pain.
Then place a cushion under them, the patient's legs are also to be cushioned, as needed.
And especially use this method for treating an intestine that has been infiltrated by humor.
And when the pain has subsided from the patient's legs or feet, cum that there are other similar causes, the leg should be treated with cauterization, as a remedy for those conditions.
When the illness affects the feet, it is called gout.
And another on their legs and toes.
When there is pain in the legs, it is customary for doctors to call it a “fractured” condition.
And if the bones are inflamed and painful, apply to them as you would with a hot cautery.
Then place a cushion under their feet and on the affected area.
Then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being affected by the cold.
And if it is necessary to make a poultice on the foot, place a cushion under them to prevent the pain from spreading.
And if it lasts three or four days, then you will cauterize the sinews.
When the patient's intestines are troubled, they will need to be treated. And cushion or protect that part of the body in which the pain occurs; and place the other under the leg where the ailment is located; and you will see the result.
You have already opened the table upon which the patient's foot rests by their ankles, put your foot on the table to help, and put a cushion under their legs.
And for other injuries, you should know that it is common for doctors to say they are caused by accidents.
Capitol .xviii.  means Chapter 18.
This translates to:  "And for the woman who has been treated by the doctor's word."
When a woman's intestines are inflamed, she should be treated with a hot compress.
And thus the midwife will place the woman's belly on her knees, and the woman will be delivered; but the woman's womb will continue to be filled with pain.
And then place a cushion on the patient's thighs and another on their legs, so that they are supported.
Let the patient's pain be soothed by the application for seven days or thereabouts.
And if you are treating a wound on their legs, apply a cushion to prevent swelling.
When you have filled the space between the patient's legs, it is healed, then the treatment is complete.
And if a bone is broken in the lower leg or foot, it is set on the other side.
And in that which is right, you should place a cushion under the patient's intestines, so that they are protected.
And thus for three days or so around the patient's body, the cloth will be wrapped around the affected area, which is called gout, and it is treated with a cushion to keep it warm.
Capitol .xix. is a French word that means Chapter 19.
Then apply the treatment to the patient's body.
"And another thing, if you are going to use a hot cautery on the legs, be careful not to cause burns where the cautery is applied."
Then you must place your hand on the patient's head to prevent the plague from affecting them.
E aprop commena restaurare le fractura, if the pain persists in the legs.
When an abscess develops, you must return to the patient's legs on the third day at most, if you want to avoid amputation.
When the bone is affected above the skin, it can be dangerous.
Mays tu has una preparazio per la dolor del metge; then the surgeon should apply a cushion to the area between the patient's thighs, and place their hands on the patient's foot.
And if the patient has pain in the leg or foot, you should apply a cushion to their limbs.
The patient's body has acute pain, and it is important to use a cauterized tool for treatment.
Then you have already opened the legs up on them, and place your hand on their feet, and another on their thighs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then one should be careful that the intestine or other organs do not become affected.
And if a patient's leg needs to be treated for a condition that makes them ache, another person should hold their hands while you treat the leg with a cauterizing tool.
And then place a cushion on their legs so that the bones stay in place.
Then cover the broken bone area with cushions to prevent swelling.
When a surgeon has already reduced the bones in the case of a patient, if it is necessary to make incisions in the legs or on their foot, do so carefully so as not to cause further injury.
And then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is sharp or localized to their small joints.
And if the bone is returned to its natural position, the patient will still feel pain.
Then apply a poultice to the wound, and apply your hand to the affected area if you are using a cautery in its treatment.
Then leave the other intestine exposed so that the wound can be seen by the doctors.
Then if they are careful, you can call it the plague of the patient's wounds. The following sentence translates to:
Then, if pain persists in the joints, then you have to apply a bandage on the affected area.
When pain comes upon you or happens twice to a patient, we apply hot compresses to the painful area, as well as those on their legs, and they will be relieved by applying the same remedy twice.
It is customary to apply a cautery to the affected area when the patient has a swelling in the legs due to bad humors.
You should apply a cautery to the foot if needed. And if there are those that have pain in their legs in the case of gout.
When a doctor has to treat a patient who has a disease that causes pain in the feet, they are called
And so you will apply a poultice to the affected limb for twenty days or thirty.
It is customary for doctors to use a cautery on the foot (or other parts of the body).
The treatment of the ailment called gout, which affects the foot after an injury.
This text should be written in Latin or a language similar to it, so that the meaning can be understood by those who are familiar with the Latin language.
then use a cautery on the affected area to control the bleeding.
And so the pain in the legs would be alleviated; but if the patient has an illness related to the feet or ankles.
Therefore, if you wish to treat a person who has been affected by the disease, you must be careful.
Chapter .xxi.
And if there is already a cushion placed upon their legs.
This is translated from the French word for "doctor" meaning that the doctor is being described as one who has been treated by a doctor for something else, and is now treated in such a way that the joint pain is no longer caused by the original cause.
If a patient has gout, they should be treated with a cautery applied to their legs and thighs.
Then apply your hand to the patient's body, so that the water would be applied to the affected area.
Another version of the translation:
And if you are to treat a broken bone, let the patient's legs be held apart.
If a wound is causing pain in the joints, it is necessary to use the appropriate treatment for that type of injury.
This is a passage from the book of Hippocrates's teachings.
And when the patient has pain in the joints, which is recent, apply poultices made of herbs to relieve them.
And if it is necessary for the patient to move their limbs with light pressure at all times.
And if it is necessary to cut into their legs, use a cushion for that.
In the following lines, we'll be focusing on translating the original text into English, assuming it's from a medieval medical treatise written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, etc.
This sentence appears to be in Latin.
Dislocation causes pain and stiffness in the affected joints.
Therefore, when there is a need to treat a gouty condition, one must be careful to avoid further injury by using a sharp cautery on the affected limb and only applying it to the area of the pain.
And for that reason, the patient's legs should be kept straight and the intestine should be treated with another cushion.
When bloodletting is required, the surgeon allows the blood to flow from the patient's leg, they release the pressure on the vein, and then apply a bandage to the area.
And every member should be treated by applying remedies to the affected area.
And if the injury is due to a fracture, and you've determined it needs to be splinted, then splint them carefully.
And then apply medication to the affected area.
This refers to the treatment of a dislocated jaw.
E altre dislocacio del piez e del joch, si'n troba la causa de la paraula que se diu que es en la cama.
When there are only slight imbalances in the body, they often correct themselves naturally.
Mays he who has the first symptoms of dislocation be given a complete reduction.
And then apply heat to the area of the foot, which is what they do for gout.
When the pain is severe, apply a hot compress to the affected area, but do not delay in seeking medical attention.
And so when a doctor diagnoses gout in the joints, especially if they are found to be stiff or unyielding, use a cushion to ease those symptoms.
And if he has to sleep on their back, make the patient's head raise up from the ground, so that he can move his legs freely and allow them to be treated.
And if you wish to administer a poultice to them, use a cushion to prevent further complications.
And if it is difficult to move the legs or feet of a patient suffering from a painful condition, then use of force will make it worse.
And when there are openings, the doctor will know that it's gout, and advise them to use cushions for support.
Chapter 25.
And of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder blade, you have already reduced the pain.
The doctors are saying that if you cauterize the pes, then it is necessary to have cushions on the body parts below the knee to prevent the burn from causing pain in the legs.
And then the patient's foot is to be treated by you. And thus the patient will be able to move their legs again.
And then apply that cushion to their legs, and strengthen them.
Then apply to the person who suffers from it that which we have said concerning the treatment of the intestines, and the intestines themselves should be treated in this way.
And if the pain is in the foot, hold it still and calm it.
And then the patient's condition requires a strong hand to hold it back.
E a quo per lo trau (the source text)
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Know that you should know that which is understood by the term "arthritis."
And the second one is that the body is already dislocated, with a cushion under them, but there are other things to do.
And if you have a major pain in the legs, it is customarily said to be caused by a cushion being placed on the patient’s legs.
When pain is felt in the foot, it's a strong sign of gout.
Then, if there are cushions in your body, they should be removed before you apply heat to the area of pain.
It is known that the displacement of the bone from its usual position, you know as a cushion, is called a dislocation by doctors when they see it, and if one has pain in the leg, they should be treated with caution.
Then apply your hand to the leg to prevent further pain.
And from this dislocation is made a light reduction when the person is fresh and the joint is still new.
And the minister carefully cauterizes the patient's legs, so they are gently treated.
Perhaps if the pain is in the legs and doesn't go away, even when they are bathed in warm water, it may be a different condition than just the usual aches and pains.
Then a cushion should be placed under the affected area of their feet to prevent them from being afflicted by pain.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to their wounds. Mays if severe the patient's legs are affected by gout.
And so it should be treated with other methods.
And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling by making incisions, they should use the cautery on the affected area only when necessary.
If the gout affects the legs, put a cushion over the head to prevent pain from spreading.
Then apply the bandage to the wound.
And if you want to help someone who has been stung by a bee, place a scale on their chest and then another on their legs.
And when the cushion is placed on the legs of a patient who has a hernia, they will be well-served by having their leg muscles stretched in order to relieve pain.
And if the body is affected by pain in the intestines, it is customary to apply a cushion on them.
And if there are already cushions under them, then you can begin to treat them.
If a joint is affected by swelling due to injury or other causes, it's called gout when it affects the intestine or a cause of pain in the gut or breastbone.
And if the patient has had the bandage on their legs for seven days, and the swelling hasn't gone down, then you should know that it is not a simple bandage for them.
The patient's intestine or chest will be treated by cauterizing them.
And if a patient has a pain in their joints or other body parts, administer treatment.
And if it's a serious case, the patient should be relieved from pain by using the appropriate methods.
Then apply the proper name for gout.
Treatment for gout.
The and that's why the intestine cannot be treated as if it were simply a sprain.
Then you must use cushions to hold the affected area firmly, for if it is not supported, it will be difficult to heal and cause further pain, and if left untreated, the infection could spread to other parts of the body.
This is a recipe for making cushions for the foot and an ankle or leg brace to restore the intestine and stop the patient from needing two cushions.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it means you have gout.
And if the dislocation doesn’t go back in with manual reduction, use forceful manipulation.
When your body is cold, it is customarily to apply a cauterization.
And if the arm is affected by pain from a cushion on their hands, they are often treated as if they have a disease called "the other things" by doctors.
When the physician applies a bandage to the leg, one should place a cushion between the knee and ankle to prevent further swelling and allow for proper healing; and when the physician touches the joints with the cushion of the joints, they may feel the joint pain caused by the specific type of injury.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, which should be applied by a doctor.
And so apply cauterization to the legs if they are formed, but leave the patient alone when you are done.
And if you see that the joint pain is in the foot, then apply a poultice to the area and leave it for several days.
And if it is necessary, the doctor should make incisions on the legs or feet, and apply a poultice to the affected area. And another [person] you put a cushion under their hands. Then put the cushion under his intestines, for he is a very bad doctor.
And if you wish to cauterize the legs, place a hot cautery on their spot to burn them.
**Chapter 28.**
Treatises of treatment for the ailment known as malaute.
When the bone of the foot is dislocated, they are treated with a light cauterization, but the other bones of the body are more susceptible to inflammation in the process.
And then the reduction of the dislocation of a joint is that the surgeon reduces the bone or apply heat to the area.
But consider if it's a table or a chair, and the doctor will put his hand on the patient's foot to help him place their legs on the table.
And so it is good if you have returned to the health of the body.
The patient has no use for a physician's advice; their case is straightforward, they have gout.
And so the pain returns, apply the cushion for 5 days; if it does not subside, apply heat for another 5 days.
Then apply heat to it, so that the pain will be relieved.
Capitol .xxix. means Chapter 29 in the original language.
And for the treatment of a dislocation of the fingers, the physician uses a cushion to hold the dislocated fingers.
At times, you must apply cushions to all limbs.
Then apply a poultice to the affected limb, and return the patient's finger to its proper place.
And thus the head of the toe is supported by the cushion placed upon it.
A cushion will be placed upon the patient’s legs while they are being treated.
And when the pain is in the legs, place a cushion under them, but do not allow it to remain on the patient's legs for too long.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the leg, open the location of the ailment.
And similarly, when it is caused by cold humors, it is called gout in other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx. translated into English would be:
The cushion is placed on the patient's body.
When there is pain in the joints that are above any spine or other bones, then they are treated with cautery and its remedies are applied to the foot.
And if the patient has trouble moving their legs, and the pain is in the area of the feet, it is necessary to apply cushions to the affected area.
Therefore, it is called gout.
Gout cannot be cured by removing the cause from the body.
Mays in their chest, to which the ancients say that they are accustomed to returning to the patient's body with those who suffer from a fever or a cold.
The patient's body must be moved to make the points on their legs stop hurting.
And then, apply a poultice to the affected area, but do not let it be too tight.
And if a patient suffers from an ailment that causes pain in their legs and feet, apply the cushion to the other part of the body.
Then apply the other tools to treat the affected limb.
And so they will be called "strong" in the case of the leg which has been tightened by the pain, and another servant will place their hand on the foot, and another will hold the head and yet another will place cushions on his legs.
And if there were two or more members who had suffered from the ailment, they are treated with the same methods as those for which the doctor applies the heat.
The doctor holds the patient's feet while others help them.
Perhaps put a cushion under their feet if the patient's legs are too weak to be used for healing. Then the physician applies a cushion to the patient's legs and will place his hands on the remaining parts of the body to apply the treatment.
And if you use a poultice on their legs, it should be applied to their thighs and the area around them.
When the intestine is affected by humors, and they have to be treated, then you should apply a hot cautery.
And on the patient's hands are two lengths, both equal to the length of the palm.
Then place a cushion on their leg, so the patient's legs don't protrude from the other sources.
E aprop deves reduce le dolor e mas cushion your stomach.
Then apply a poultice to draw out the cold humors from the affected area.
And if the patient's condition is such that they need to be treated with bloodletting or a different remedy, then use liament for their legs.
If pain persists after the treatment, other remedies may be needed, such as a poultice for long-term relief.
When you cauterize the joints of the body, it is customary to burn them with a hot iron to prevent further injury.
Of the body's parts, which are affected by gout.
Another version:
la ancha y el cuerpo, apply another cushion to prevent the pain from spreading there.
The intestine can be affected by four different types of displacement.
And if it is a member's foot that needs to be treated, it is another way to apply cautery.
Then the patient has gout in the leg, and you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if the doctors see that the intestine comes out, they should treat it as a condition other than the usual dislocation.
When there is pain in the foot, it is necessary to place your hand on the area where the pain occurs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg of the one who has a dislocation, for that place a cushion behind the leg so as to keep the joint from expanding too far, and use another cushion on their other leg.
May the physician consider the type of injury and its location for this reduction of the bowels, and use appropriate techniques.
Then apply a poultice to the recent dislocation, and use cushions for the patient's legs and chest.
Then apply a strong poultice to the area to be cauterized.
And so placed on their legs are cushions to prevent the intestine from coming out or behind the breastbone.
And they are going to be called gout by the doctors because the other ailments should be treated as such.
This type of treatment is commonly called surgery.
And when the dislocation is healed, et havem to the other parts of the body.
When the patient's leg is dislocated, it must be put back into place; then hold the hands in place.
And if it is necessary to make the patient's intestines or bowels return to their cavity.
And this type is cured by the lightest kind of cauterization.
When gout flares up in the foot, apply heat to the affected area.
And let it be that the intestine of someone who has an ailment is four fingers long, while the other is two fingers.
And if the pain is in the foot, two arms length away from the ground.
And so apply it to the head of the patient's leg, for the young person who suffers from it will be accustomed to it.
Then apply another cautery to the dislocated joint.
Then if a member has a stone in the bladder or kidney, it is necessary to use the hot tongs, e.g., the other way around for the intestine.
It is customary to apply heat to the affected area, then apply another cushion on their legs, and another one on the patient's feet.
And if the dislocation is in the legs, use another cushion for support.
E si las joes
And if a surgeon has to be called, one must put the affected limb in its place on the table, and he must apply another cushion to the area where the patient's leg was.
Then you will apply a cushion to the legs if necessary —
And compare it to the other leg.
When the pain in the feet subsides, apply the cushion to the foot again.
Then apply to that area whatever remedy you deem appropriate for the cause of the ailment.
A cushion should be placed on the patient's body to prevent further pain.
The text describes a medical procedure involving cauterization, likely for treating a condition called gout (in this context, meaning "a painful inflammation of the joints").
And the patient shall be treated for a dislocation of the thighs.
The patient has three types of pain: a hot burning pain, a cold piercing pain, and a pain that is caused by a blockage in the foot.
The signal for applying a splint to the leg is if the thigh is dislocated; another signal indicates that the patient should be braced for the application of a cautery on their feet.
And if the patient has pain that is located in the limbs, they are to be held down by the doctor, or otherwise the doctor will apply his hand to the patient's face, he will put a bandage on their knees and ankles.
And if you want to treat the area below their knees, you should apply a poultice on their thighs and another on their feet, and hold another poultice on their legs, which are affected by the disease.
Then place a bandage on their foot for three days or four, to hold it in place.
For the patient's legs are to be healed by keeping them in bed for several days.
If a hot humor affects the legs, the physician should apply cauterization.
And if it is necessary to treat someone who has gout, the physician would use methods to draw out the excess cold humors.
On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area and hold it in place so the body part doesn't move.
And that the patient's ankles be treated with a cushion to prevent further injury.
The treatment for you is to apply leeches to the affected area.
This translates to:
And if the patient's right foot has pain, then apply cauterization to the right leg with the left hand.
Then apply your hand to the patient's legs and another two to the body.
Here is the translation:
And if you have already found the intestine to be inflamed, treat the patient's legs with heat.
And if it is necessary to repeat the procedure in two steps, it is done.
Mays si a tu have leg pain, you can apply a bandage to the affected area.
Then return the body to its natural state by removing the stick from the foot of it, and carefully hold it in place so that the pain in the leg does not worsen.
And if the patient's legs are opened, it is for the good of their health.
Then apply an emplast to their legs tightly and secure them in place.
And put your hand on their chest to prevent the intestine from being affected by the pain.
Then let it be left alone for two days or three; if the pain is gone after that time.
And so the patient should be treated for their ailment for three weeks. This is a guess at a translation based on the context you provided:
And if a poultice is necessary on the foot, it must be applied to the affected area.
Chapter xxxiv.
The treatment for a patient's injury involves applying a hot cautery to the affected area.
When a patient has a dislocated leg, treat them gently as they are being treated by a physician.
If a person suffers from gout, they should have their foot cauterized if it is necessary to drain fluids or use other treatments.
Then place your hand on the patient's legs to ensure the intestine doesn't come out again.
And if the patient needs to be treated for any other pain in their body, then place a cushion on their legs.
This part of the body refers to the foot and is treated as an anatomical term in medical texts.
De la dolor of the dislocated or broken bone, which one knows if they are painful.
When there are no other causes for the pain in the knee, then the doctors say it is death.
May the patient be healed by a careful hand, already skilled in the art of medicine. Then apply a hot poultice to the area to reduce the swelling.
If the patient's leg needs to be opened for surgery, then a cushion should be placed under them.
And if the joint is dislocated or fractured, you apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you want to cure it, you should use your own judgment to determine which remedies are appropriate for the patient’s condition. When fine, gout was called by its proper name. Amen.
