O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the fulfillment of it, its end is achieved in it, and by its expositions and by its declarations, it is my view that you complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with my, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with my hand is laid low in our region and in our time completely private, while many perils the science of it, and its vestiges are held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and become subject to those errors and confusion because their clauses are understood and the force of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you bring to life that with the arrangement of this treatise, in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand is found in our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires the actor to be previously exercised in the science of anatomy, which recounts the Gualia, because it knows the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the junction and separation of them; and it has the knowledge of the bones, of the nerves and of the cartilages, and the number of those, and the emergence of them; and of the pulsating veins and of the quiet ones, and of the places of the emission of them.
And for that reason, Hippocrates says that with a name is nothing, but in the work little, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not acquainted with what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he will not fall into error for which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that science and their experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed, and the woman died between her hands.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that a stone from a man who had processed in his state be swallowed, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for that man on the third day died.
And I had already appealed to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, I knew above him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a black crassat who was broken in his hip; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he set it according to his desires, and then he ligated it, and then he left it for some days, and commanded that we untie the ligament; and it stood thus, that the hip and the foot became infected, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I appeared to untie the ligament, and achieved tranquility and thus, he was free of his pains.
But however, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the malice of it was magnified to its lord.
The cause of which is that the cautery is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not come to it with iron at all, but that it be in a member that suffers that it be held captive by all.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my hand be devised in two divisions: that is, in operation that is associated with health, and in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already exerted this in all places of this book in which I come across operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you that you guard this and leave that, so that the foolish do not come to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and praiseworthy success, and leave the diseases terrible of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is remaining to your glory, and more so in the world and in the end to your sanctitates.
Gualia already said in some of his monitions: “Do not treat bad diseases, so that bad physicians are not called.”
And I have now divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head within feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of leeches, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered of the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered of the head within feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
I say that you tell the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its consequences, and in what completion it should be prohibited cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its consequences is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already of it have spoken a great multitude of wise men, and of it they have been disagreed, and to me suffices a little of the sermons of theirs, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cautery compares to all complections universally which is in matter or its matter, except two complections, which are complections caudas its matter.
In the cauda and dry complection in matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to that, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient is that illness cauda and dry with that which is caut and dry be healed.
And they said those who say the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all cauda and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the sermon of that, that experience this to me some times has discovered.
But however, it does not come upon this that which already is explored and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complections, it is not upon you fear, and mostly in the cold and humid illnesses, for already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and do not disagree in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, it is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not reach the other member attached to it except with little consequence.
But the action of burning medicine reaches to that in the members which are distant from it, and greatly makes them come in the member illness of difficult healing and greatly difficult.
But the fire, for its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do that except that it is superfluous, and already it is to us known by experiment and by length of service of study in the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused from the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this pause to you secret hidden with the fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree of the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, because so that the consequence for the time accident is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is thrown, and mostly if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared of those that come malice, that is greater than little consequence entering for the time.
And thus do not catch in your minds, oh, sons, that this is not esteemed but the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, so it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not said all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not at all so as they think about it, because cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidities which are cause for that pains come.
But however, cautery superfluous over the medicine for the desire of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns in some hour of the time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and that which is reached to it in its acquisition in victuals and things similar to those causes; otherwise that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humidities, as well as cautery of tooth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but it is made in little.
And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is right speech, not that I understand in it, because I believe that there is no cure that benefits with medicine or with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is in contrast to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it benefits to that. And therefore, that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding that the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and found that it does not do so except in some bodies, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want by the heat of the gold, and that it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it on fire, the gold melts by the fire, and in the fire some sheets so that the craftsman catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason, cautery with iron should be done more lightly and more carefully to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that later the one demanding that wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness over the nerves of which are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the ears flowing, and multitude of sleep, and of toothache and of the goiter, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that you require the virtue of the illness and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then make that seat between your hands on a low bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the root of your palm near the nose between his heels. But however, as your saying of the middle place has arrived, sign that place with a ten, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that on the place signed with a ten, in the manner that it descends, with which your hand is constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being uncovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of a grain of ears, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone that I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in oil and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with tetrafarmacon ointment until it is healed.
And they already said that when the plague remains open, so much better it gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And they said some of them that it should be cauterized the spine into the bone, and that the cautery should be held until some part of the whiteness of the bone is burned.
And then scrape that which is burned of the bone, and then it should be cured.
And they said others that with the cautery it should reach the rear, until it presses into the bone forcefully until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate that from that place the vapors of the head expire.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cautery have not been seen, except in some men according to their way of fear; and leave that, of me, it is better for health, when it is; because the head is opened by the solution of continuity of it as well as we have testified in the other members, and most of all when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more saved and better of me; and of that use and with that work with health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and it is prolonged in the patient, and use of herbs, potions, purgatives, plasters, poultices, compresses, and other remedies, and mostly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which they recount and does not benefit him in any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds a very great burning, then cauterize him with another cautery besides that one a little. And then cauterize that on the horn of his head with a cautery while the code is parted. Incise the code and uncover the amount of it which we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and that is the place in which the cupping glass is placed. And alleviate your hand in that, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by that finds much great pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the nape are cauterized is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of  a non-ancient hernia.
When pain in the head is felt, or pain extends into the eye, it should be evacuated with medicines that modify the head, and the other cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if nothing helps, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute medicine that burns, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and you scratch that and separate the extremities of it from both ends. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet wide while it is in it made a place after the code, while it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopper for descent constriction, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then untie the and pull the alum, and leave the ulcer for two or three days, and then place over it a cloth submerged in broth while the place makes a crust.
And then cure that with an enema while it is healing.
And if you want, make this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clove cautery, because the head of it is as shaped like a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount of it that is burned by the sharpness of the bone is as much as most of it, and remove your hand so that the artery which is below is not burned, so that no flow of blood comes.
And then imbibe cloth in salt water and place that over the place, and leave that for three days; and then place cloth ground with broth, and then cure with an enema while it is healing.
And if you want, cauterize with the extremity of the knife-like cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this hernia properly non-ancient.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of an ancient hernia.
When you cure a hernia with what we have said of the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and if it does not help the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not reach it what we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then you must ignite the knife-like cautery while it is white-hot, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which most of it is said, or where that is; and hold your hand for a moment and strengthen that while you incise the artery and reach into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is bad for chewing, and that the lacert is not burned and the nerve which feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and especially to him who ignores what is done and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation in it at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the regimen of blood flow accident of the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see of this illness that this cauterization does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the ulcer while it is healed.
And if you are, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of the cauterization of the artery, with a cautery having two handles, and this cauterization is better and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has the name point, of which this is the form:
And when pointed, ignite it, and it is led around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever. Lengthen it with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little as if you were sensing the place with a probe.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of tumors.
Tumors which are cured and with cauterization are nothing but of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with herbs and purgatives and gargles, and if you do not find comfort in your cure, then when you cauterize the malady with three cauteries: the first you must at the root of the ear, the second a little from its temple, and the third you must at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, more sovereign a little over the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the codena is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is shown opposite. But however more subtle is that one a little as if you were seeing; and when the handle in its place of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is oppositely processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure that with what we have said and you do not find comfort in your medication and the malady has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on top of all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle location of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the cheekbone. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said.
And already it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it should be cured with what you process.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of forgetfulness caused by flame.
When those who are given to the patient at the beginning large herbs and pills the serving modifying.
And then shave the head of the entire patient and place on the cheekbone of him a poultice of cetre described in the treatise of poultices.
And pause that some times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed well; and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with what is processed.
But if you add to it and the malady is that tolerant, then do to him cauterize in the middle location; and if you see greater addition, then cauterize that on the two horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
When you process in modification of the head with herbs and with what we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with cautery in the middle location of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the rear part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the malady of softening of the body of too much that and the maladies tolerant and the malady is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the loins, and certainly with cautery until it is burned from the codena of him, and raise your hand. And then care for that within that is healed, and this is olive oil cautery.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if one modifies the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer guarguardians and mastiguators to the brain, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the victuals.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then cauterize it with cauteries which I have said, having paralytically and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the lower back.
And be olive cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then make a decent tourniquet on him over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be sentient, and be held from every part.
And then pause liniment; and it is more worthy of border antic of sheep. And warm that over the fire for moderate heating by measure, which the said suffers when it is most in him. And then pour that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him inside that it be cooled.
And do this water to the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that it is healed; or if you will, cauterize that doing small points according to the most of him, unless that you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a special cautery which wets the brain with equality.
And then pause that coated in wool or in grease of guanine.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient to drink water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And do that to soak in a bath in degue for some days.
And then command him that he scrape his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of the ailment of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the code; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see from him fluxes of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and with the abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the heels are old, suppurating and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluity of cold phlegm, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water causing in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you need additions, then cauterize that in all parts of the heel's tail on the extremity of the overgrowth with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of nasal stench.
When you medicate that with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip yourself and give to the patient the cochias for three nights; and then scrape the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries above the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter .xv.
Of cautery for softening eyelids of the wheels.
When the eyelid of the wheel is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all part, and be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter .xvi.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the wheel when the hairs are converted to the parts of it and prick the wheel.
When the hairs of the wheel are converted to the parts of it so that prick the wheel, cauterize in those as second two manners, that cauterize or is with fire or is with medicine comburent.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient before that he may see his hairs as those that they are washed, until that they be prolonged and equal; and if prick that of you must the lord of them, then you strengthen the wheels of him with a bandage so that it not be bad until that the hairs be born.
Therefore as they be born and equal, then pause the head of the patient in the your, and then send upon the eyelid of the wheels of him with tent, with signal the which be according to the figure of leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the signal near the hairs.
And then pause coat embedded in album of huou or in mucilage of ptilli upon the wheel.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize upon the figure which as signed, little by little, in many ways, until that be burned the surface of the codena which is as such as leaf of myrtle, all apparently.
And signal of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wheel already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated from the prick of the wheel.
And therefore elevate your hand and laysa that for three days, and then pause upon it coat with border until that be eradicated the scara. And then cure that with enguent until that be healed.
But if returns for the hairs any cause to their prick and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery upon that as well as you had done first.
But if the hairs so in the eyelid of, then cauterize that until that be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not prick the wheel.
But the cautery with medicine comburent this is that you command the patient that he may see the hairs until that they be prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of leaf of myrtle.
And then take of sabon known and of caus viva ana unc. That is, or that, and then mix those causes well, and make that with festinacio so that it not be frozen; and then expand of that upon the cloth which is made as form of leaf of myrtle, and pause that upon the one wheel or with both; and pause of the wheel coat embedded in album of huou, and the head of the patient be in the your.
And pause the said upon the medicine and press that a little and not the mauguas until that the patient feels the mordicacio of the medicine, for mordicacio is in it as such as of fire.
And therefore as perseveres that the atrobo mordicacio, then laysa the medicine and mau that with the tieu said; therefore as cessa the mordicacio, then remau the medicine and wash the wheel am aygua; and then considers if times the eyelid ja es levated as such as is washed from the costriccio am foc or am incisio, for therefore esta be; and if no returns upon that of the medicine upon the loc in the which no ha empremut the medicine and no be denigra until that be equal your operacio and be contrayt the wheel.
And then pause upon it coat with border until that be eradicated the codena of the adhustio, and then cure that am enguent deafinicon or am autre until that be healed.
And is necessary to you, from the your operacio that guards with pervigil diligencia that in the wheel not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid aprop alscus days is softened and any cause of the hairs prick in the wheel, then itera the your medicine upon that loc the which of the eyelid is mollified, and properly as you have fayt al comensament, and then enaviro it until that be healed.
And this is the form of leaf of myrtle.
And know that the wheels of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the parvitat, and therefore according to that is made the your contraccio.
And the path of rectum will not be hidden from him who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your knee, and hold his head some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not moved nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which is concave, as is the shape of a cane or a vulture's feather, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it may be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you wish, it may be shaped as a tentacle.
But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it blood and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery in the grains of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it were necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and enclose it with an astringent enema until it is healed.
But if after eleven days it is not healed, then place on it an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first said:  enter into the place of the fistula and cut it open, and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which this is the form: And put into it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a fine retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place on the heel of the patient a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because the lead will burn the place of the fistula and heal it by a miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to the core of the nose according to what will come in its place properly.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is:
And it is the concavity of it according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that init carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there should be an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is antiquated, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure it and your cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that it is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited in the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand until it reaches the bottom of it, and at the back of it do so once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the wound is cut off and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the angivas.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come shortly, so that you place the point on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then take your hand away, and then iterate the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then spit it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the inflamed gums are softened and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a worm in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take the horn of a cow and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a handle and wrap it over the tip of the handle, and then immerse that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly until it is seared.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a stick in the heated horn below, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the tip of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you wait for the tip of the iron or of the cautery to be heated, and that it has some thickness in it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery is seared; and do this several times because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next.
And so that by the impression of that cautery the patient rinses his mouth with good broth and keeps it there for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterizing extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and of cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you want the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cautery whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cautery may escape through the other extremity, and place that ignited on the abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the tip of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in broth on top of it until that which the fire has burned is healed.
And then cure it with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterizing a sore throat and of constricting a vein.
When the humors come upon the throat of the lung, and mostly when that is of cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that of the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
And be careful that you do not reach the cautery to the larynx nor burn more than a little of its coating.
And cauterize that with another cautery of the junction of the neck at the lower vertebra of it. And the cautery of it be shaped like the previous one.
And then cure it with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterizing lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or phlegm and the disease is old, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the sternum in the depressed areas of the left and right sides; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot between the two toes; and let the cautery be shaped like the previous one.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure it with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three ramps because cauterization is done in this way: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterizing a tic that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and it is not fixed in the hour of its return to its place, and by a slight movement it is dislocated as it should be, as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and then have the patient lie on their back or on their side; and then elevate the bone which is in the front part of the skull to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is dislocated in the front part.
And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the groin so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be that of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place on the cautery porous cuits with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery chisel or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dried up and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach a burning and many humidities because that extract from its composition and so multiplies rawness to it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then when the patient is on his two supports, and extends his hands and his legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery left the foot for the quantity of a finger with a cautery chisel, and with two cauteries left on the two sides of the cautery, so that it comes the figure of triangular cautery; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a puncture.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the groin.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form added, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach pointed to that one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the feverish liver.
When there is pain in the liver due to cold, or humidity, or excessive windiness so that from its normal composition it is thrown by superfluous egress, and the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confirm it, then when the patient is on his two supports, and feel with tension three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria, the honor perceives the position of a man.
And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery mot.
And if the quantity of water that is adhered the quantity of the majority of the width of the groin, and there is no more adjusted; and if the patient standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then he is lying down, the one who has already extended his legs, and elevate his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery chisel, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and be adhered the width of the whole groin so that it be adhered the whole body and reach into the intestines, because the groin here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there is an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel heavy and pain will be more acute.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is acutely aggravated and sometimes that already fatigues the physicians the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is facing on his neck; and then feel the location of the abscess with tension; and then light the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which has preceded on the other page. And cauterize with that i cautery until the whole groin be cauterized, until it reaches the  ciphra, until it be healed.
And then cure it with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery except for that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many diseases have been known; but with experience some times have been bold on this operation, but nevertheless leave that of us, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristolochia to pleurisy burning according to this manner to be made, and this is that you take of the roots of aristolochia long dry a root pun long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then immerse that in oil and put it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries you have guided, one slightly declining to the side that is right below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the scapula, declining a little to the sides behind; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the sides behind; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And no cover with your hand the cautery, but rather be in the manifest of the codon in work.
And already some ancients said that some of the men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it is foraged healthy, thus as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because he so soon accides in the place fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are straightforward, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the liver equally.
And do not cover with your hand the cautery; and the patient be raised on his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticles, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the codon which is in the straight line of the spleen the hon to reach the lying of the left patient.
And be your elevation with which you elevate the codon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then between the two verticles, ignite it, in that entrance where with those you penetrate the codon of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and then are made four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three verticles.
And then you cure the cautery as if it had been laid down for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cauterization of hydropic.
Cauterize not in hydropic but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that cauterizes with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the spirit of the codon.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid down for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with that which cover so that two understandings be added to it, and it is festinated to it with the help of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be clavilh according to the form of which is used previously, and that with which the back is cauterized be olivar according to what is precedent to its form.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the things.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropic and are filled with clear water, cover that cauterize the feet over the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the clear water remains.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two things two cauteries, and in each thing be made cautery with the extremity of the cautery cut. And be the cautery according to the length of the thing; and one below and the other below the middle of the thing; and on each thing two cauteries.
And leave the plague open after cure for a long time so that no water remains from it.
And then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is due to cold and humidity that should be cleansed of the virtues, so is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these methods of cure and no others, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery clavilh; and with cautery on the skin over alozis large, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize him on the peritoneum and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for it is a perfect cure of benefit from which there is no error.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors cold or of corrupted humors, and are cured by what we have said in the division and no others cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spondilh of the small and small triangular, and with cautery below the navel cays for two ditz.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him be cold and his food not digested, and the face of him sometimes apoplectic, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with a cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of a boil near its abscess.
When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that abscessed boil, and lastly your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then take care of those with what you confer to them of the poultices until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the nature of the parts, and it is ancient, corrupted with pus and humors, and therefore that which is most worthy of being covered is that which is preceded by a subtle cautery, and then you know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned cautery.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it enters the cautery.
And iterate over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it corrupted, or it comes from those causes of which recollection will come in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it is necessary pain by cold or by gross windiness, and by this the patient's body is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize him on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a cautery clavilh of which I will precede the recollection.
And firmly cauterize them with the second one a little, so that three cauteries lined will come, and then they will be more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there occurs in the bladder weakness and softening by cold and by humors so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize him in the part just below the bladder, like the beginning of the peritoneum, and cauterize with one cautery on the right part, and with another on the left of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the knots of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cauteries should be made according to what is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of cauterization of the uterus.
When there is heat and humidity in the uterus, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the coming of them is delayed, and pains occur in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the area below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cauteries should be made carefully.
Chapter XL.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are poured into the area of the hip, and are caused by the swelling of its place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in that which is behind.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the area of the hip with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circle of the area as it is turned, and so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery should be of the kind that preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cauterization according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire hip bone; and take care that it is healed.
Chapter XLI.
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the area of the hip, and it is caused by heat and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, therefore, when you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with medicinal burning substances, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the area of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the cautery olive or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery should be on the middle location on top of the head of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which the form was preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, the one that is containing and burning the thickness of the entire hip bone.
And this is the manner of cauterizing the sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the location where you feel the pain; and with one cautery on the cavity for four fingers a little below the fleshy part.
And if the cautery is a knife-like one, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the hip bone.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends into the location near the toes, then cauterize that here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four, or more if it seems necessary.
And if the patient feels pain below the hip, then cauterize that here with a knife-like cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that by this you do not harm the patient or cause contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the cavity and ended in the cauterization, and the leg inflamed until the tumor reached the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted the whole foot. And then a strong solution of the belly, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the hip, a cautery of which this is the manner: make it like a circle of iron, of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from that circle, make another third; and be the spaces the which is between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be open on two sides; and be the length of those keys a knot or two knots, and make in those marks of iron decently fitted in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then light it in the fire until it glows and throws sparks, and then place it on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with a border and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: O, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
May the cauteries burn those who suffer them, and may they find that place of theirs.
May cauteries with medicinal ointments be that you make two circles having a hole pierced in which they put the guaffo of the iron door; may the length of the sides in the navy be two nuts or whatever those are.
And if the space which is between some is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they be open below and above, and they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place on the patient's back the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand on the area of the back; and then take some hot water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the burning of it — for that bite is so as of fire — until the bite ceases.
And then elevate your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all the back with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and place on that border until the blackness of the burning is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it a poultice; this is the end in the healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make to it a statue in it that contains water according to that it is made in the back equally.
And this is the manner of hot water, and you already have I written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of caus in the extinguished of both ana part one, and thrice them and place in a new bowl of which the lower part be pierced for a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into it ray.
And place below the bottom of the bowl another bowl inverted, and pour over that alkali and caus live water cool which takes those for a finger, and as soon as you compress those with your hand for good compression, and leave the bowl that descends from it water sharp in the lower part to the inverted bowl.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caus and another renewed alkali, for that one now is of strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation makes of fire.
And so of the medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezizic and honey anacrat and caus with sabo in such a way that they be mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of back and of sciatica vein, and magnifies much well being of that, and says that there is no need of other cure, and that it is healed for one time as it recounts, for fort well that intertwine in bath and he sees already of that.
And it is that it be taken of certain rag green, and if it is not found green, it be taken fig of recent; and much be thrice with a little of gray and it be placed on the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it be tied.
And it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the burning.
And then put that in a bath and therefore when the body of it be roasted, introduce that into the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cauteries with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with the wound of goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits to him well; and let the cautery be with it according to this manner: take wool and be it soaked in old oil, and let it be placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take a dry goat wound and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it be extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the sensation of the burning reaches into the back and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of two.
Sometimes pain is in the two for many causes, such as for blow or for percussion or for superfluous evacuation, and for causes ad those seeming, for infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize only this particular species which is made by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar ones, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of the patient, because you have to cauterize each line with the cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four with a medial chisel cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gumbositas.
Often this disease happens to small children; and a sign of its beginning in children is that they have accidents on their structure in the leg and the elevation and movement.
And  atrophy in the last vertebra of the lower back and its nodes that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see that and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which presses the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after curing the location until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization is not administered in gumbositas that are made by a spasm of the nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured by means of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the ankles or to the other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that on each pain with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand with the cautery before, be only around the shape of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the ankle of the lower back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hips only, and it is called sciatica, then point in the circuit of the hip bones as they revolve, point in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point in the circuit of the hip bones on each node and on the heel of the hand.
And if the pains rise near certain joints in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize those of all parts of the armpits.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and the phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines are protruding before the hernia, and this begins to grow, then, as you command the patient to leave their food on their day and use of lenitive causes so that the wound descends from their belly.
And after following the patient between your hands on their back, and command him to keep his leg inside so that the hernia is thrown or the intestines appear.
And after returning that with your fingers and feeling the rupture on the bones of the pelvis with a sign that the extremity of which is similar to the majority of the circle to the upper parts of the body.
And after igniting the cautery of which this is the form of it:
Inside that it is hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after placing the cautery on that sign with your hand with a cautery standing straight, and you take that inside so that with it you can get the bones of the pelvis inside the middle of the groin; and repeat with that another time if to you that has not been achieved in the first time inside the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine so that it does not come to the patient death or other great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bone, do not hinder your operation.
And cover that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And after cure the place of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And after cure that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lie on his back for forty days until the place and the plague are sealed.
And cover that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his cure, which lines the belly of him, and that the intestine does not come out, because of the effort of healing.
And after when he wants to rise, after forty days, then administer him decent food, and keep him that for another forty days.
And be moderate in work and repletion of food and drink, and of voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to tug, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and be that which is excised from the codena as well as the third part of it; and after cure that with that which we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already say some first that rupture be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
And it is placed a line that goes by the latitude in the side most superior of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then cover that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to the magnitude and the smallness of it, and virtue and weakness of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for by custom of those pains it is that they are pointed of member to that member which approaches to it, so that cover that you cauterize those until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times with cautery for great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and that cured with that which we have said in the division and do not cease, nor is it, and fear over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of him and all the complexion of him, then cauterize that over the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second further behind it, and the front to the end of the hair; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And last your hand with the cautery a little while until it impresses on the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are displaced, so that the expiration of gross vapors be alleviated from it; and cauterize over the flesh according to as it is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then cover that you cauterize that with those cauteries the ones which we have said in the head; and with a cautery over the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two cheeks, and with two cauteries over two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the vertebrae near the hip, and one over the ribs, and with two over the ankles, and one over each ankle, and with two over the knees, and one over each knee, and with two over the elbows, and with two over the muscles, and with two over the tendons of their feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and over each heel of their feet, and over the hollows of their hands.
And guard yourself of the nerves which are over the talo that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the penile and with another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that when you adjust more cauteries, so much is more beneficial and more conferent; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as well as they have, for so that the body of him already is stupefied.
And cover that the cauteries be great or few according to the members and the joints according to as it is preceded by the species of the tools.
And then carefully apply the cautery to the area with flour of herbs mixed with honey and the other cure while it is healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When some member is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed member with a cautery according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the depth of the bone a little. And then treat that with an enema while it is healing.
And sometimes cauterization is done on some stupor which should be to the limbs and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and the place of the nerves which carry to that member, and the stupor is removed.
May no presume about this but rather he who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the egress of the nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal enemas, then you cauterize over that with a cautery beforehand a little according to the quantity of the depth of the bone until it is removed the whiteness and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.
And then treat that with flour of herbs and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a round bird, from each one a part and all are mixed, and then let a cloth be lined and placed on the spot until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of a boil.
When a boil begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery around it as it is turned.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the pointed cautery in the middle place; but to me this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more straightforward that it be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in ripening, and thus it is due to the superfluity making that, or to the age of the patient, because he is old and decrepit, of little blood, or to the time, and you want to hasten the ripening of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and then let that be cut out when it has ripened.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it: and pause that in the middle place of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery in that place that is furthest down, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then treat that until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of a rodent.
A rodent is a corruption that walks in the limb, which corrodes that as a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore if you see that rodent in a place that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite a cautery of small, pointed, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the rodent is.
And then cauterize that from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption and no cause of it remains.
And then let it be cut out for three days, and place on the cauterized places a cloth soaked in olive oil until all the scabs are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then treat that with enemas that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good is; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what is raw in the corrupted places.
And a rodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in the place of cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more gentle help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when of it you have necessity.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of warts and of other similar things.
Many times there comes to the lower parts of the foot a malady that is called a wart, and it is a rough, protruding, thing which burdens the foot; and cauterize in those is in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery concave resembling a vulture's claw, which be made of iron according to the quantity which contains the wart from all sides, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And let him rest for three days before he begins to wear a bracer. Then apply a poultice of wild mallows, crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on for one night, for it will eradicate it from its roots.
And then cure the area with a wash of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you must administer cautery to those with water, and that you take a small piece of lead or iron or vulture's bone, and place it on the boil; and then pour a little water into the piece, and hold your hand, and you turn it with the pressure of your hand, and press the edge of the piece into the root of the boil, and the water will go little by little into the root of the boil, and wait for the patient a little while for the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove it, for the boil with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do those, and the other until you come upon all of them on the body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the boils are eradicated with this wash which the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to a fire in the nerve or from a feverish cause, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with olive oil cautery.
And the tremor of him will be rested and hasten the health of the feverish illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
When on the body are spots white, and are pustules split, which are made of gross corrupted matters; therefore at the beginning when it appears, that it be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and if they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, they do those, and it heals from those.
But however, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of blood flux accident by incision of artery.
Often times there is a blood flux from an artery that is incised, the plague which must be forgone, or from the incision of boils or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you must quickly cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place upon it your finger, tightly pressing that many times until the flux of blood stops from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number a few, and exhale upon them until they are a little ignited.
And then take of those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, upon that vein hastily pressing that you have removed your finger, and place the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another malice.
And know that when from the artery blood flows, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not with one of four ways: or with cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him are well burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with a cord or with a ligament for strong structure, or that be placed upon it medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be tightened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction of him with a ligament and with structure with cloths or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer unless shortly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated upon the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of him until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more sew in that which has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incisions and perforations and venesections and of phlebotomy and of ulcers and their appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all the ailments in which the use of fire cauterization and medicine is appropriate, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for it with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the hierarchy of the head among the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the inquirer may be satisfied on what he has requested.
And before I begin this, know, fils, that in this chapter is what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that which you should know, that great caution is needed here, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times there is a dangerous evacuation which is with blood, and with which the life of the patient depends, the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the fistula or purification of the ulcer or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their appearances. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the hands of those, the death.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that which is in this state, because sometimes it happens that you must handle the ways of men with many ways of diseases. And of those, some will go away with their disease and it is lighter for them the death, and so because of the vehemence of what they find of their disease, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his hope and said, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom is this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause on that except with certain science which verifies that for you, and to which by the succession, praiseworthy success.
And use in the cure of all your ailments of prognosis and indication of them to which health is converted, because in that is to you the helper on the acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
O, fils, God in you breathe his understanding and no os to direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head among the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated that which you have requested of this and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this ailment many times happens to children of the birth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, it lives.
And sometimes it happens because of a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this ailment except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death has come, and so it is to me seen laid out work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not sit upon himself for the greatness of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased until death came.
And this humidity is either added between the bone and the bone, or it is added after the bone upon the skull.
Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is few, then you should do in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure as two nights within that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then are here two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is after the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts of the head and it is not that to you hidden. Know that you should do in the middle place of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision extract all the humidity; and after strengthen the fissures with cloths and pads; and after embroca that of above with wine and oil within the fifth day, and after untie the bandage and cure the wound with tents and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member be comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, that you consider the appearance of the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where appears the abscess and the repletion of the water, and do it according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and it becomes filled with blood and the patient dies because of that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When someone has a catarrh or wounds in the hands or feet, and it does not improve with treatment, then the last resort is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries, the patient raises his head, and you cover the area with rough cloth so that the arteries are visible, and you tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and you consider where the vein lies; and the locations of each on the locations that are near the ears are depressed, and they are hidden unless in some men.
And then you press on the artery with your finger, and you incise each one with the edge of a sharp instrument, making an incision that reaches the bone, and this is done by the width of the head.
And if you want, you insert the edge of the instrument below the artery and break it at the incisions on the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is about two fingers' width, because when a vein is incised, the blood comes out with a pulsating egress, which jumps out with frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then you press with your finger, and make an incision into the bone.
And this is the quantity of blood that you should get rid of is the quantity of one ounce. And no more or less than that, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery of him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the cephalic, then incise that so that it does not become an abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with cotton and bandages of cloth, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter .iii.
Of the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When someone has an old or acute migraine, due to humidity or quality in the lacerations of the temples, or an old and vehement headache and similar ones, and is treated with the methods of medical treatment and this does not improve, then we resort to these ailments the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hair that is in the temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men because of the vehemence of the flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient is tightened with some cloth; and you cover the area with rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the bone with that with ease until you reach the artery; and you cut into it and extract that to the superior parts until you extract that from the bone and uncover that of the tunics that are below that, in every part.
But if the artery is subtle, then you wrap that with the tip of the knife, and you incise from that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not bring a flow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood of all.
And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. Within three.
And if the artery is large, then you should tie that in two places with a double strong thread or with long cords, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and it will bring a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity that is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cuticular cautery until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that metyssa work.
And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the finishing humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And when you have extracted the arteries, you place a poultice of decent quality on the area, and you treat it with dry medicines that make the flesh rise and with hot water until it heals.
And if while you are working another vein becomes a flow of blood from the artery, then you take care to restrain that blood, either with cauterization, or what you place a poultice on the area, and tighten your hand until the blood is restrained. And if for any of those reasons it is not present to you, then place your finger on the area until the blood is coagulated, and immerse the area in water of vehement coldness until the sharpness rests, and tighten it as you should.
And what is lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and after a pause, a little, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of him, because they are not consolidated entirely with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is the same. However, if they are less sharp, two handles are better, because if they are sharp like two handles, it comes close to each burn, and it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those [handles], there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better in all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles are the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the care of the body of acute and sour rheums of the heels.
When the rheums are sour, and the body of those veins which are on the test of the head of the fore, and do not confer in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in his forehead walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the old agro mixtures in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with spassa.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead, and then cut three incisions on the forehead equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lacrymal ones which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself of the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if to you a piece of sponge dressed or cloths dried quite with which you dry the blood.
And then introduce the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the parting of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the chisel which is on the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then stract with this spatula and introduce into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the sides of that sharp of the flesh annexed of the flesh, and the sides of it lean within the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs from the blood quantity equal, express the places of the pieces of the congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure a poultice of old cloth, and pause on those powders mixed in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and beware that it does not become an abscess.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tebeba, and then cure that with a gargle of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of rheums by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts within the head.
When a certain catartz is sharp and continuous, and sometimes the heels of the patient are exhausted a little, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the forehead of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from many veins of the inner parts proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut on that one incision in the middle place of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and elongate your hand from the lacrymals of the temples which are bad of the mastication), until it is the bone uncovered.
Exsiccate all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with linen cloth. And then tighten under it with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess.
And when you untie this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound where the bone begins to grow flesh, and then care for it with a drying regimen that causes the flesh to grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and of it make a poultice and administer it in these sores at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catches in the ears.
Every cause that catches in the ears is one of four kinds, whether it is mineral stone or a similar cause, such as iron and lead, or it is of plant, such as celery or bean, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and sour wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when stone catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and pause the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient snort with condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of snorting. And then place in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forced out with these causes.
And if it is not thrown out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the epicyclic gesti subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is thrown out with the gesti, it is well; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not thrown out by this, then make a canula of brass and insert the extremity of the canula into the hole of the ear and close around the canula with wax and softened oil so that it be not open except the canula. And then extract with your wind with strong suction, as many times as with the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not thrown out in this manner, then take of halka illuminated or of vecz apparelled with which the birds are taken one small quantity, and place that in the extremity of the ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not thrown out by all the causes that we have recounted, then you ought to cut that before it becomes an abscess or a spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make that cezer between your hands and convert the ear to the parts above, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear, where the gray of it in the place well pressed of it. And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches the stone, and, the stone being broken, remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the catching cause in the ear is one of the grasses that grow and swell, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice and so, then you take a subtle teune spatula according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that grass which is caught in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and prop extract it with the oncis or with the subtle gesti, or with the incision as we have said, because the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover the patient with a snort with condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is thrown out, it is well; and if not, then take many small stones and lions according to the length of the finger, and calve those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another stone upon the stone which is within the ear. Therefore do not cease this with the stone until all the water is thrown out.
Therefore do not cease this with the stone until all the water is thrown out. And already the water is thrown out so that you take paper or of gonc, i.e., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this so many times until all the water is thrown out, and straz that with a canula as it has been said of the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of a beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as it appears and similar, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes the appearance of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is lighter than all the other causes that catch in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat that with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you must watch the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if here appears any cause of the worms, then extract that with a stick or with subtle instruments, but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, of which this is the shape: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this, then you plug and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And this is the effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape: And make that of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole, and flat at the top.
And therefore, as it is in the cavity of the tube, which is here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it at the end decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the reed with cotton upwards and press with your hand that with temperate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear be already scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you will distill into the ear be not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not suffer that.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of ear blockage.
Sometimes babies are born from their mothers' wombs not perforated, and this happens to some men, blockage in the meat of the ear by plague or by flesh nothing in that; and this blockage sometimes is made in the preon of the ear canal which does not allow the passage, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the ear canal which does not allow passage, is in the most difficult dispositions of healing.
And in that one in which you achieve passage, then you must place the ear of the patient in the sunlight and watch it. And therefore if you see blockage appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the blockage is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you take that with subtle instruments and cut that vehemently easily until all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is in the ear canal, then take a subtle reed long and scald that with fire a little, and then put that in the meat of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt blockage with that which the patient finds easily, by the gravity of the ear, exert the oppression of it easily; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put that in water and pulverize on it, following the three times, and use it; and if you see the ear already being suppurated, then you must extract the pus and replace it with another one which you wrap in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the pus cauterizes; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there happens a flux of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use of the other cure which restricts the flux of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cure of the atheroma which develops on the eyelids.
Atheroma which develops on the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is moist, sometimes are dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with instruments, and you cut them with a spatula of their roots, and then place on the place three times.
But if pain with flux of blood appears, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is after the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of the great swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many things happen in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause a swelling that is assembled in its strength and hardness, and because of its greatness it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider it here if the swelling is proceeding in it that apart from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, cut on that with a fissure along the width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it escapes, and then suspend that with a bandage and cut off that.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with suture; and care for that while it is healing.
And if it is little, to you it will not bring harm for that because the ointment of it restores that and encases it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, you must scrape the surface of the inner part, then you will open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, another that you do not dig from incision, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, that is not noticed in any cause.
And then with the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and care for the place with water that encases while it is healing.
Chapter X.
Of the cure axcirnah in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath is gray which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accidies to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that because tears are collected to those.
And because of that, those times make them sleep on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, those which already have covered inflammation, and imminence of accernac appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel accernac inside those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places their head in your, and then places a cloth on it and makes a poultice, and makes a circle of it according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then places that on it and presses with your fingers from all over so that it may be aggregated arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then cut in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incisive with a fissure along the width, and the fissure is not larger than the fissure that is made in flaubotomia.
But in the preon cove that you make the code entirely while you reach arcernach, because in the most disposed processes arcernach by fissure according to the form of grayseza blanca.
Therefore, extract that with cloths those which you have enveloped between your fingers to the outer parts and revolve between the right and left hand while it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scrape it.
But if no arternach appears to you at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease while it processes arternach; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and wine and place them on the place and strengthen those with powders.
And if some that sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure so that what is removed from that humidity.
And then care for it while it is healing.
But if it happens in the place apostema caut, then cure it with emplastres cedatils while it is healing.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs from the adjusted below the natural hairs and they are antiquated, then those annoy the eye and make become manners of illnesses as such as continuous tears and softening of eyelids and film while that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye, and cure is done in four manners: or by cauteri with fire; or with acute medicine according to that it was said before in the chapter of cauteri; or it is made atactini by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I say.
And therefore cove that you place the head of the patient in your, then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, introduce a needle into it in which it is faithful of the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with faithful below, and that be — near the margin of the eyelid in which naysso the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the faithful to the parts below with the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
And then cut in the part inside of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with spatula incisive of the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the faithful and place below the eyelid small powders of coto or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with a tent, and be as such as figure of a leaf of myrtle.
However, the shape should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because some of them are those who indicate that it should be incised of the eyelid a large amount according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
Then bring the spatula over the two lines that you have incised, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller lacrimal duct. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as is the thickness of the king.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the wound, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a thread or a fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere that which is superfluous of the threads on the two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then care for that.
And if you want, leave the scab sutured, and care for it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid being raised needs the sealing of the scab and the adhesion of it; but suturing is better, and therefore, thus I say the ancients to taxanir.
However, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another way to taxmir, and it is that the shape on the eyelid is like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three unclamps separated and congregated according to this form:
But if this is not possible, have the unclamps, and this is not equal, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between the said ties the threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole wound on which it is incised as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to the incision or the fissure, drain that abscess with a cautery and similar to it, and with hot compresses.
And some times it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are converted, then it is necessary that you use in that what we have said of incision; but suturing in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is incised according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle spatulas of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the hull, and constrict the canes of each part with a strong constriction, and leave it for some days, because the wound by the constriction will die and be denied and will be able to enter until it itself falls.
But if it is late, then break it with the forceps, and then care for the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of stinging hairs in the hull with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, and prickly in the hulls, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and put in that a fine thread of cedar and lion, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and nuts in a way very subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in short, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair adjusted the one which has needed to be engineered, and make that penetrate into the eyelid carefully until you extract that out of the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out and introduce that into the alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair is agitated with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the alixalati is thrown and the hair is not agitated, you will throw alixalati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be agitated alixalati of the top.
And see that with the vision of the hull, because then you will throw alixalati and the thread, and groat some and close the hull, and leave the closures for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and is born on that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter until it is elongated a little space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure of the cataract that comes in the eyelid above.
When it appears in the pupil and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards, or on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of a scab or incision or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by the consolidation of a scab or incisions or cautery, or by something similar to their malcuratz.
The way of the operation on it is that you break that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and place in it in what is between those a piece of linen cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And beware that you use of cures of it from the causes which dry it, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than at any time you have not had.
Use in that of causes that soften it, as fennel, and boil with the water in which are cooked the root and seeds of it, or a decoction of  liquefied  with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in it, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all ingenuity that which is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the cure of cataract that is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract that is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly named cataract; and it is of it some natural, others accidental.
The more accidental is made by scab or incision or cautery or by other similar things.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal right, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and stitch it with the needle, and incise it with a wide spatula. And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns according to what it was, it is good; and if not, take the ray and place it in the wounded figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and be of their made angle, that when they meet, be made figure of them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then place the flesh that for the amount that is the acute side of it below it, which is the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it is healed.
And if cataract arises from fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make with a flat fissure on the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that it runs in it the operation, according to what is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the skilled artificers always prepare ingenuity in any way that is possible to it so that it makes the figure return to the natural form, or close to that, and that patient according to what it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men so that the eyelid is solidly joined above with the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards, or extend it with the unci.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which not be with the sharpness of the incisions, have obtuse a little so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision that which excoriates that adhesion with ease until it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that the whole adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye saline water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of it, and place on the eye wool infused in egg white, and then the third day use of consolidating causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and of the prominence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that the nail is of two manners, whether it is nervous, and it is similar to a hard, fine cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture congealed, which when it is touched, or it is forced to take on an incision, it is cut off and the onci is not put in its place.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal within which it goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient puts his head in the low, and then opens his eyelids, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with an onci of little duplication and extends it to the upper parts. And then takes a needle and introduces into it a thread of horse, or bull, or wax, or of similar, or strong thread, or duplicates the extremity of the needle little by little and puts it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates it with the needle, and ties it with thread the nail; and extends it to the upper parts, and excoriates with the thread the edge of the nail which seizes the pupil. And thus you follow it with the thread into the rear of it.
And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the lacrimal natural so that by incision of it do not become continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail with the sole thread extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a spatula lion of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea tunic and that it becomes in it rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision is put in the eye a little salt crushed or a drop of cef made of sinjar, and let it remain for another day; and then care for it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put in it the onci, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recommend in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula of sharp freul according to this form: With subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and is confused and taken in that root, then distill of your hour in the eye a drop of cef made of sinjar or with cef rog or with salt crushed, and cover the eye for another day.
And then repeat over it the operation until it is removed all that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess may be in the eye, for then you let it, and care at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great harm, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not incise continuous flows of tears.
And then distill in the lacrimal cef rog and made of sinjar until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of alguezardenic and of that which is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some is born red flesh, and it is over-placed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts of the front and is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient puts his head in the low, and then opens the eyelids of it and collects all that flesh with convenient threads to water, and take it with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not cut it during the course of your operation.
And let your incision be with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which the ascebel is collected according to what will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt crushed, or distill into it powder red and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of abscess may not.
And if there remain any cause of alguezardenic and is generated blood, and you fear abscess, then let the eye and care for that abscess with water that yields that abscess, and then repeat over it the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye freul by natural or accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter xviii.
Of the collection of blood in the heel.
Blood is veins that are gathered on the heel and prohibited to the garment its operation, and they lengthen the heel for days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the heel in which is blood is strong and in it there is no other ailment that blood, then you collect that blood.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or with two according to your prudence; and that ounce of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two ounces gradually in a body according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstergeys the blood hour by hour, as long as those veins are being remaugudas from the heel and are being revolgudas.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the heel with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not inscribe but those veins.
And when you will have complitz, then you distill in the heel chief green or rouge so that with its acuity corrodes that which is remaugut from the blood.
But if that is not possible for you to collect everything in that hour, then you plaster everything with that which yields the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is sedated and that it is assured of caut apostema.
And then iterate over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter xix.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it but that you make on the abscess of you the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the poyre until it is uncovered the bone.
And therefore as it is uncovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called aspre cap, and it is made of iron, and its cap is rounded as if it were to be gripped, and it is made pointed by the point of a file or aliskalfati by subtle point (as it is in the following form).
And pause that upon the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolves that between your own teeth, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And this is done several times, and then restore the place with exsiccative and stiptic causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and is abscindit the body of the sania and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostemat and it does not happen in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in it engendered but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover of second bone with iron or with acute medicine, and as soon as it is uncovered the bone, then you take tribo according to this form:
Let the extramitat of it iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be prim extenuated at the extremity as if it were so.
And then pause that upon the bone, and it be that near the lacrimal; and elongate your hand a little of the heel, and then revolve your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as it finds vent to issue through it when you your hand.
Therefore then restore the place with stiptic exsiccant medicines as you have been shown.
Therefore as soon as the flesh and the place is endured, then the matter which effused to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is more light upon the patient.
Chapter xx.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel eminies with its totality and does not happen in the garment harm or diminution, then cove that you relax the patient, and then that you follow, and then that you pause windy in the cervix its scarification and suck for good succaccio; and then pause upon the heel liniment the which is made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strenh the plaster upon the heel with motz polvils.
And the manner of the polvils is that you take cloths of li leons motz, and each cloth be duplicated in four plecs; and fay of those motz.
And then pause those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the heel has need. And then strenh upon those with hard cloth with fort strictura; and iterate the ventosas with succio ses scarification; and then osta the ventosas and leave the heel streyt the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then cove that it be mot streyt.
And then osta the ligament aprop the day and the night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the stricture and the cupping instruments until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of a man is formed by this, and you want to cut this, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the side below to the side above, and then put the other needle with a double thread on the lacrimal side, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then remove the needle and place it on the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, together with the whole part in a circle of cloth around the wound, adjust the prominent eminence, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes to the bottom of the wound, and run the albuminous humidity, and descend the wound and enter soon.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This disease which is called alconati is nothing else but the one which is adjusted in the wound resembling a descending water and it is not that one.
But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient sit on the saddle arranged and upright, and then take his head in your two hands and pull it so that you see the healing coming to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and let the light be, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared to the healing with the water that we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and put it on that over the panniculus, carefully removing a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the place where it is void), until the healing is removed.
Therefore, when it is removed, then you distill into the wound water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water of the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which one you should pierce with a serum, declaring, then that according to the health.
Then, you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his wound tightly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound where the water is is the left; or with your right hand, if the wound is the right.
And then with your right hand take an almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand with that.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already arrived at the void cause.
And let the measure of the path of the almond to the bottom be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where the water is, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends soon, then wet the patient's wound with water over which he looks soon, and almond in his wound.
And then rest for a while; therefore if the water has descended, then you rest that other time until the almond is thrown.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll with that your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
But in those that are of our time, place on that comi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness — because it is some of the men whose wound is hard very much — then you must take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the shape:
And therefore pierce with that that juncture, and do not end your hand in the trace, and it is not if you do not make way for the almond place subtle.
And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete the work, prepare the patient to sleep comfortably in a dark room, where he sleeps on his back, and he is prohibited from all movement.
And rest in nature for him so that his nature is purified, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
And then unbind him in that dark room and prohibit the view of the cold, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not cover that you do this at the hour of cures or as soon as the infusion. You must however alienate this so that the water flows gently and with great and vehement regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the wound before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that causes the abscess to subside.
Then you should cover his vision and place a cloth over his face through which his breathing is regulated, leaving him for several days in the dark room.
And then he should be removed from that room gradually and converses about his causes.
And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from vision sometimes, and then you should be bold about the operation.
And now we have reached some of those who are in Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which the water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen any in our land who has perfected water, nor have I read about it in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be on those who ignore those:
And they are made of brass or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as such is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse carns adjusted of which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of moth weight, or a polyp weight; and this malady is called polyp because it is similar to that weight represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, lapadea, of dusky color; and of it is that flesh lion not of dusky color.
Therefore, in that which is in these carns leon not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sunlight, and cover his nostrils, and pierce your finger into those carns. And then extract that to the outer parts, and then incise the water that you have comprehended of those with a sharp and subtle spatula from one side, so that you know that all the flesh is gone; if any cause of it remains, of which the abscission is possible, then you root that water with one of the subtle instruments with ease, so that nothing of it remains. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him that which you must; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that so that it is abscised blood and all the cavities are gone.
And then be put in the nose after the incision, either a strong wine and water, or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that deep within it is flesh nothing in the pus, so that the bones of the nostrils to which it has not reached abscission.
Therefore, then you must introduce a thread of lead into which there is some thickness, and use in it moth nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nostril with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
And since that has been done, that he should smell the odor until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and be spit on his throat, because troops of times the semblance to this action do the children in the schools, and it is lighter cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the nuts that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the engorged corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
But if you are in need of a cure that requires, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which are distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make a poultice of silver or lead, which is similar to a small open lamp, thus like a small bowl, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a pipe, and the nozzle of the instrument to be a maker of purging and be flat, uncovered; to which handle in the back of him, with which you hold when you heat in him oil or water that you wish of the suckable juices and causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the nails in the extremities of the nose.
Many times the nail is seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days within which it is not seen the regard of it.
And for that cove that you inscribe that in the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all that. And then place over the area the cautery or medicine comburent which was in the place of it.
But if its incision is late within which it is magnified, then consider if it is petrified, hard, of dusky color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron, for it is a dangerous abscess; for many times to him who incides this abscess, it is due to him great malice on him who had it.
And if the abscess is of leon touchment and not of dusky color, and times that incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incision that without fear, and cure the place with water that exsiccate and constrict within which it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of suturing the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblances.
Know that when accidents dissolve continuity in one of these cartilages, little confer in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it is due to some cause of those, that you consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that within which it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you must excise each part of its code apparent until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those pulverize blood of drago and enses trissat, and place over the powder a piece of diafinicon plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and change that plaster and leave that until the threads are by themselves abscinditz, and then cure with enguent until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as to you and have done known.
Chapter XXVII.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts of the inside.
Many times it is due to many men in the parts inside of their lips some abscesses hard resembling fat of errs, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you must convert the lips and fendas each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then the abscess incision, fill the place with sagi trissat until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with vi agre and be cured the place with water that is stipticitat, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly of times nay on the gum flesh adjusted which the ancients called albulus, therefore you must suspend that with onci or that you have that with the forceps and incision that you must the root, and leave the sania run or the blood.
And then place over the location sagi trissat or other stiptic or excicative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incision that secondarily, and cauterize that, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts inside and of the outside and between the gums are adjusted rough, scaly, and some times are of nigras and are made citrinas or vertz until the gum sees through that corruption and are made the teeth rough.
And therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your knee, and ratz the teeth in which appear those scales and causes resembling sand until of them there remains no cause, and this do of the blackness and of the citrinitas and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if this is the case at the beginning of the reason, it is good; otherwise, then you repeat the reason on those the next day and the second and the third until you come to the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of diverse forms and figures of drills according to how it is prepared for your operation. And because the razors which the tooth is scraped from the tip of the tooth are different from the razors which are scraped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Extraction of Teeth.
Take care that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take your time in the entire extraction of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the healing of it when it is extracted, for it is substance sublimated while it is being excused in the extraction of it.
But take care when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you firmly ascertain which tooth is the painful one, for many times the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must ascertain which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums in every part, and then make that with your own fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concusses.
And then with a strong hold, have great firmness for good communication or strong stupor, and place the head of the patient between your own teeth that you hold well so that it does not hurt, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one below it from every part with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must compress of cloth that break and tighten that with the extremity of a fine ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with hold.
And you must work delicately with scarification in the circuit of every part of the gums and guard well your strength that you do not break that and remain a part of it, and return on the patient for the malice that may be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fistinacio and audacity over the extraction of theirs, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men illnesses great ones that are more difficult to be extracted, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the mandible as many times as we have testified.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if there flows blood for this, as many times it should, then sprinkle some quantity of zegi and asperge it over the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle hold with which the tooth is bad at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you must operate with them.
And be as many times of thick handle so that when you tighten with them they are not bent, be short extremities.
And they be made of Indian iron, well made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some intrude in the others and tighten by strong constriction, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so it is called, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxx.i.
Of the Extraction of Teeth and of the Extraction of the Bones of the Jaws Broken.
When you must extract a tooth which is broken and there remains some cause, then you must place upon the place a poultice with border for a day or for two until the place is softened; and then introduce some algesti or hold with the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of them be made of flint as if it were a lime or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your easement with these forceps or holds, then you must cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And it be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by that the root is fore-gotten, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of a fine point.
And now you have helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the shape close to the following: And with other instruments which I will precede in the shape of teeth; for the scraping is done with this instrument which is assembled like a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular tip twisted or short, which is some thickness, and not embedded so that it is not twisted.
And another thing, that the instruments of the teeth move so and similarly the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what to him signifies the operation and the diverse maladies; for they are of the maladies to which the ancients did not say nor posed proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if you can, then it shall be cured over that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And be in it some thickness little by little, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all be set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to that.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it be healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the teeth eminent above the others.
When the teeth are eminent not according to their natural course, for those the shape is this, and more so when it befalls women, and more so to the venerable old ladies; therefore, as you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp tip.
And be your incision with which you incise that in too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be damaged by other of the teeth.
And if the eminent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And be all of Indian iron the margin and well-set; and be of small points as much as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth be damaged and broken. And then line that in the end, and root that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which one part is fractured and it lies the tongue, then as you file that until the sharpness of that fracture be stayed and leveled, and be filled so that the tongue does not touch it and the word does not break.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with filings of gold or silver.
When it happens to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which he eats, and you have cured that with stiptic medicines, and it has not been of value your cure, then so that it not be broken, it is made in those that are strengthened with filings of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes green and as soon as possible, but gold no time is changed.
And be the filings in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the form of the straight is that you take the filing and take the double of it between two healthy teeth, and as you grow with two tortuosity of the filing between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the teyssiment into the part of which you commence, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it not be damaged.
And be your string with which you strengthen the filings must the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then incise the extremities of the superfluous filings with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert those and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not make lesions to the tongue. And then release that as tightly as Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filing in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as these tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the falling of each one, and they are grown as we have recounted, and that they remain.
And that is done only by good artificers and wise men.
And sometimes it is suitable some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made of them as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place in which the tooth fails, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and happens by plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevates his tongue, and then incides that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which the tongue is freed from its recess.
But if in that there is some hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you apply an oil and split it along the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the flesh of the preon and that you split here the artery and blood comes.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with wine or with hot water; and then place the tongue in its place; so is the way which holds the patient the tongue in every night so that it is not consolidated another time.
But if blood flow happens, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood vents, then cauterize the location with a cautery of tin which is convenient for that. And this cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess happens on the tongue resembling a small lump prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which the mouth is swollen.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient sensing before the sun and considers the abscess.
And if you see it of a dark color or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the oil in it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place desus zegi trissat, that is vitriol, within which the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work within which you have treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure that with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of an abscess of the ears and of that which is nothing in the goiter and of the other abscesses.
When in the goiter it is swollen, so are the glands which are assembled swollen, which happen outwards and are called boils, which when you cure them with water that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; leave that within which it is matured, and then either you will extract that, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, radon, and the root of it is subtle, then that is that it must be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested it with a complete rest or if it is diminished with any diminution; and then do make the patient stand before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of him from below with an instrument of noble form of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle with a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and catch upon that your gaze, then take oil and put it in the opening, and pull that to the parts outwards as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the right of the other, very sharp, the which be of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not to you present, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a furrow, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient guard with hot water.
But if it happens flow of blood, guard with water of decoction of bark of millegrain or of leaf of myrtle and similar to that of the stiptic causes within which the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure that within which it is healed.
And sometimes there are born in the goiter other abscesses other than those boils, and incise those according to what I have said in the incision of two furrows equally.
And I have already treated a woman of an abscess which was located in the throat of her, the abscess tended to a brown color, of little feeling, the one which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited to her eating and drinking of water, and she had already arrived at death if may be for a day or for two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had two mouths inside which they came out through two tracts.
Therefore, I thought to treat it fistularly and I stayed in one of the openings, and I pulled out that one, and thrown out of it a large portion, and then I incised that one which I understood from the other tract, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I stayed the opening in that abscess.
And then I abscised a large portion of it, and it did not run from it except a little of blood. Therefore, absolutely was the throat of that woman, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she ate food, therefore I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and a succession of abscesses succeeded in the place of that one, which incision entered while it was prolonged.
Therefore, I brought a needle and cauterized the throat of her, therefore, as much as an addition; and then I walked around and I did not know what God had done of that after me.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
When catarr arises in the boil, and it is abscesses and it is long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and it does not compare your cure, and it seems many times that abscess cauter already is out of it and it is subtle, then cover that you incised that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that length, and it is sanguine, of brown color or of black, and it is not at it feeling, then cover that you attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient to lie and press the tongue of it with an instrument of which you process its form and then stay the opening in the navel, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments the ones which are said in the incision of two wells.
And cover that you do not incise that but the water that is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise of it more, you will lead its speaking.
And after the incision, use of water the one which have been recommended in the incision of two wells, and cure that while it is healing.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you stay the head of the patient in your knee, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument the one which we have said, and then take of the water the one which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and make it with that living cause, and stay that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument the one of which this is the form:
Be the extremity of it concavity in which is stayed the medicine as well as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and stay the instrument with the medicine over the boil, and the patient yawns over his latz so that it runs saliva or mucus of the mouth of that by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend of that any cause over the throat of it and that it leads that.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and express that over the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take cotton and envelopes that over the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton in a tube of above until the cotton adheres in that tube, and do water as many times until you achieve water that you want of the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that because it dried and falls about three days or four.
And if you wished that iterates the medicine, iterate that, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cotton embedded in border, and modifies with that water that is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured before with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healing.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, chamomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged with hot wine, and boil; and the olla be well washed with decent lut, and be in the middle place of the olla a tract, on which be stayed an instrument concavity of Aram according to this manner; be made of silver or of Aram.
And the extremity is inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula over the tonsil, until the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then repeat this moistened procedure until it dries, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much tighten the abscess, and instead of doing this, you should declare the abscess of it by cautery.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and on the extremity of it compose a shell of wax, so that the patient's mouth be covered, because the wax shell prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Moistened bandages adhere in the throat or a thorn of fish or any other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears of those, on which you cast your gaze, because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that to you it is declared what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because forcibly the cause annexed the throat is thrown-up by vomit; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or of lettuce root or a piece of dry bread; or put a piece of dry sea sponge on it, and tie it firmly with a cord, and then the patient swallows it, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are and it is extracted, then it is thrown-up. And yet take an eel and bind it with a cord, and it is placed and it is extracted; or take a pear and suck the top and suck the bottom.
But if it is not thrown-up by those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker than a ray a little, and in the extremity of it be concavity which you insert into its throat with ease.
And let him take his head elevated upwards, and be careful that the touching of his bone of the throat, so that it may be drawn to his body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient that insert is better, for his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pushes in down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is to him prepared before it is thrown-up.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of bloodsucker annexed to the throat.
When the bloodsucker is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you may have comprehended the tongue of him with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract that with a small pin or with a subtle gesture decently.
And if it is not to you possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this so many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and it is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day of water.
And then put a vessel full of warm water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow from that any cause and evil the water an hour after with his hand, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catches.
But if it is not thrown-up by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cumin or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it falls.
And there is another way of operation in fumigation of that, is that you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let down the fumigation; and place the patient his mouth in the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not thrown-up until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker as soon as it falls.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty and spicy things, and do not drink water, and thus necessarily is that with this regimen it is thrown-up.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: Which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is grooved, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when we grasp any cause, that does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are special matters, of many kinds, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and incision in two ways, of which one is by the nature of the abscesses themselves; and by that which we comprehend of the humidities.
And the second way is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess occurring in the head is different from the abscess occurring in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess occurring in the joint; and to each of them is its own treatment by operation.
And more than abscesses are some which ought not to be perforated until the maturity of the matter in them or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses which ought to be treated when they are ripe, and not until the completion of them, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can pour out that which is in the circuit of it, and then very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is ripe, it will cause harm to the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore perforate it before it is ripe; and do not perforate it crudely, of incomplete digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you may not be able to reach the perineum of it and it be prolonged to the parts behind the buttock, and a fistula be made, or that it be done at the term of it that it may not be healed. But more you ought to know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is ripe.
And you ought to know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and according to the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know that the perforation should be made in the place furthest from the abscess and of pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And the perforation should always be made along the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or of the feet, and in places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those which are reflected, use of perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better that the perforation of it be made until the digestion of it is confirmed according to the completion, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it is prolonged the body of the pus of it and of much filth, and very often the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or of the body, as the necessity requires, or according to that which the member indigests.
And you ought to administer small perforation, and in large abscesses large perforation and many sections according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the wound ought to be concaved and be incised, when it is made so that it is like bread and made at the term that it already follows, as those which occur in troops of boils and buboes.
And of those are those which are incised with section having three angles; and of those is the one in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those are those in which a round section and a lunar section, and similar to those, are administered.
But that one to whom there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you ought to perforate that with superficial perforation, or flat only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much matter, that you perforate it and do not take that you extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to the graduation until it is finished.
And especially if the patient is of feeble virtue, or pregnant woman, or little child, or old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the matter, and very often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
But guard this chapter with great care, and in the perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is few, or is a flat section, then you administer the poultices of it or of counter-poison; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you ought to place a cautery in each wound until they come together.
And if in the abscess is incised a part of the wound or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you ought to complicate it with old poultice or with thread made of cloth of it, as when you have treated wounds or incisions, its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process that and cure it with that which is necessary until it is healed.
But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and wine to the which you soak a cloth, and place it over the site of the blood flow many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and follow the powders that I have recommended in many places in this book and in the division.
But if it is in wintertime, and the site of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must wrap powders in wine and olive oil caut, and place those over the site.
And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you must untie the abscess and cleanse it, and administer in its cure what is proper to it until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters singularly.
Chapter .xl.
Of the section of abscesses that come in the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head small abscesses, and so of species of nodes that contain tunics that are to their fact; and the species of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are that contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are those that contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling to them; and of those are that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the form of which comes near thus, the which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split it with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begins in the section of the line of .B. inside the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave from that any cause of all, because troops many times return, if there remain from that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian enguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it for another day, because with that you corrode all that is the remains of that pellicle.
And then repeat over that wound with Egyptian enguent second and third time if you need it, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause of that pellicle; then cure the wound with enguent until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scrape it from all parts, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes contrariety, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of section and cure according to what I have told you; and section over a stony abscess is lighter, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some times there are some of these abscesses that are in the head in some men with whom there is no humidity at all; the cause of which is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and retrieved the abscess thus as a hard, rough, white, which could not be squeezed, and if anyone was struck with that, it would plague them.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head, other than this one, are not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must the roots of the ears, but the section of all these is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body be relieved of the sania in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is proper to that cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the section of scrophulas that happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses develop in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they happen in other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and are many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrophulas are many, because of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidities, and of those are the malign ones that do not obey to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is mauguda to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preoned, then you must incise that with superficial siccio from the part below to the part above of the body of the line of .G. inside the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not hurt you with the incision, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; because if you were to cut a vein or artery and you prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the plague with crushed vitriol or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the plague, and leave that inside which you have paused the sharpness of the abscess and the plague is softened and begins to be pus-filled. When the blood is cut.
Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger if there are any other small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofulous vein, then cover it so that you do not cut that scrofulous from its root. Cover it so that you press it with a strong bent needle and let it fall by itself, without harming it.
And then fill the plague with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut that whole scrofulous, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the plague and cure it as soon as pus comes out, so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the scrofulous, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what is said.
And those scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation for that which drains the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, poultices with ointment and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is coming from the corruption. And then when you see the plague already cleaned, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the incision of the abscess in the middle of the groin.
The ancients said this incision in the groin, and I have not seen any man in our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a hernia, cover that the extraction of the groin be avoided, as for that it is not done well for its part because all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover that you use the incision of the groin to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, that we incision the groin below three circles of the circles of the groin, or four with small incision for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the incision be in ciph, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for incision, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of it are there.
And if the doctor is fearful, cover that he extends the groin with an incision, and then fends the groin until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause of them.
And then incision the ciph according to what we have recounted; and it is signified over the incision of the canal by the flame which is of that which is issued with that which is of its disruption and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is remauguda in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the groin of the wound, and stitch that alone if it is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recounted, exposition is nothing but seeing that some of these abscesses have already opened the groin of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the vein of it is cut off, and some go to incision the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then command so the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in her groin and incised with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of her, and I returned the woman as if she was moaning of the dead, and I uncovered the wound and returned the blood which was issued from the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not incised a vein nor guided it, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I cured her until she was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if not for the rawness in the voice, and after some days she returned to improvement of her dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision over the abscess which happens in the throat outside, and is called hernia of the throat.
This abscess called hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not of healing.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by a blockage of the artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that it be made presumption to it like iron, but in that one which is small. And you probe that one and investigate that one with the finger, and if you find it similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that one as well as the nodes, and extract that with the water that contains it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize its whole being, and then care for the place with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision of the species of nodes.
Of the nodes there are many species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I want to count as the difference between a node and an excrescence as if making a doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and vehement pain until the boiling of the superfluity is appeased; and it is complicated putrefaction that at that hour ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts that which is like a lion's mane that is in the sac proper.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a bulb and is made like a vase, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you examine it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument that is called intromes, according to how it will come its form in the chapter which is close to this.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then lastly your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then you extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry over it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this shape: as I have taught you, and suspend that with forceps, and exfoliate the core from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be done, and then you extract it in pieces until nothing of it remains.
Because if from it remains nothing, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains some small part, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders sharp and strengthen the wound, and place over that which sits abscess caut, and cure that of the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure that with what is necessary for healing.
But if a pulsatile vein is opposite it, or non-pulsatile, then you cut and moisten the place with three times-distilled vitriol and leave that straight for two or three days until you can scar the wound and that the boiling of the blood is appeased; and then return to incise what is remaining of the node.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which some is large, and of them is medium, and of them is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They are made of iron, of lead, of extremities curved decently, so that they fit the entrance into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experients, and they are called alberts, and one of them is called berid.
And there are three types, of which one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, its shape:
The shape of the medium one, its shape:
The shape of the small one, its shape:
Convey that they are due to those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among them are those of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, large, like needles, just as large needles with which the stitches are made, and they are made of citric metal, or of copper or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of citric metal.
And they are made the instruments of black plum, which are agreed that for those are openings the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three types, because some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its constriction.
Shape of the large plum instrument:
Shape of the medium plum instrument:
Shape of the small plum instrument:
The shapes of the probes are of many types, because of those some are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three types.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three types.
And of those are having three curvatures, and they are of three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a simple small probe, shape of it:
Shape of a large probe having two curvatures: Shape of a medium probe having two curvatures: Shape of a small probe having two curvatures:
Shape of a large probe having three curvatures:
Shape of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three types, because some are large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are blunt, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be done gently in the excoriation of the nodes the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and by those may be healed the disease and restore tranquility a little by the application which brings the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they are of three types: large, medium and small, as you see.
They are made of metal and are similar to a ray with which and made alcohol.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the ailments, and they are of three types: large, medium and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of ventosa with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three types; large, medium and small; the shapes of them:
They are made of citric metal, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And cover that these species of ventouses of you large, medium and small, so that by those abscise the flow of blood with speed in necessity, and the hours when to you first is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and legs, and in the folds of the chest, and of the breasts and belly and of the groin, and similar to their fleshy folds moist.
And sometimes are made of those instruments other small ones similar to scorpions of fisacs according to this form; by which the blood is abscised when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men are inflamed because of the way they sleep, and as they become inflamed, the nipples and the nipples of women are assembled, and the Roman abscesses, are removed.
And to that one who has this, he should cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. into the line of .G., and then scrape the entire thickness, and then fill the wound with a red medicament, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sewing, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if the nipple declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should to women, then it should be cut in two pieces, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, of which each one should be contained in the other, until the end of each one, as long as the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then scrape the tissue which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said of the suture and the powders, whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of this one that should be cut because of the restlessness of the patient, and because of the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a poultice submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until that corrosive corrodes what is left of the flesh, and then take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the kind of scrophulas, hard, which have a skin that is removed.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as everything that is in the abscess is evacuated, then you fill it with old wool and leave it for the next day.
And then the wool should be removed and it should be cured with a suitable ointment, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind of nodes and scrophulas, then you should cut it as we have said in the section on scrophulas, equally.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a pimple, then administer a cautery to it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur because of an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken, and the tissue that is above it is consolidated, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you pierce the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
And that one which is due to a vein is round and prominent on the body.
And the incision on this abscess is an error, and most of all in the one that is under the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore, that its cure with iron should be avoided, and the one that is in the extremities, or in the head, should be avoided.
But on the one that is of them because of the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut in the tissue a long incision; and then open the incision with probes and the artery, and delirate the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to be able to extract two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which is generated power until the ligaments fall; and then take care of it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a section of a vein, then you should have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the tissue, and then introduce the needle under the place which you have had under your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle under the entire abscess, after the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it until when it is extracted that which is in it, then you should cut the superfluity of the tissue, and leave that which is tied from it.
And then place on it the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with herbs and ointments while it is healing.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive labor, and similarly.
And it is made most in the places of the arms or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are ill.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and in the majority of its dispositions, it is surrounded by them and when it is squeezed with violence, the patient feels like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that is added in the front of the body, and for this reason, the code is left, and it is ill in all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, because it will become very dangerous contraction.
But that which is in the head or on the forehead, close the wound with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take it with the forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and then cover it; and adjust the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 2.
Of the incision of the abscess which occurs from the cheek that occurs to the belly.
And it happens to some men, growths appear in the bellies of those and in the other parts of the body of those, which are called fungous because of their similarity to fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are turned, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is greatly magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were turned and were splitting, and moisture was running from it all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and attributed one in weight of eighteen ounces. and the other of six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the thing is white, humid, of subtle root; then you should incise it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because many growths you must expel the section of it a lot of blood; and if you vent the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient fearful and timid, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a leaden weight recently made, and strengthen it with that thing, the manner of which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the leaden thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead increasingly in the thing, until it is cut off and falls by itself its labor.
But if the thing is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and terror, and more so in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you should incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise the thing which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of slight regard, because that is an abscess of cancer.
And I come with the memory of cancer, then.
Chapter 3.
Of the cure of eminence of the umbilicus.
Eminence of the umbilicus is made by many causes; or by fissures of the skin which is on the belly, and there appears the cloth or bowel according to how it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from the vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by contracted wind in it.
But if it is by fissure of the skin and by protrusion of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion-like in pain, and then appears from different situations. And if it is by protrusion of the bowel, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of greater variety, and when you press it with your hands it is hidden, and then returns; and very much is in it, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bathing and vehement labor.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lion-like and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess to blackness declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion-like.
And the operation on him is that you consider at this time if the prominence of the navel is due to artery blood, or vein, or by wind; therefore, if it is prohibited from the cure of him, because in that there is fear and pain as you are taught in the chapter in which I said the abscesses by artery and vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then you shall try in the circuit of all the navel, and then command him that he stay between his hands on his thighs, and then surround with a spatula wide in the circuit of the navel on the place which you have shown with the probe; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large knife; and then tie in the circuit with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then break the skin of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that point and try the intestine; and if you have found it or guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and impel the intestine to the sides of the abdomen.
And if you have found the hernia, then take that with a knife; and cut the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until you can see the flesh extended and it falls by itself; or cut that when it is thinned and you can, and then cure that with water which is customary of the ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then you must concave the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that with water which is customary and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is cured with medicines, and that it is dangerous in it the cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And they said the ancients that some times cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the members allocated to extract all of that, and mostly when it is commencing small.
But when it is ancient and is large, you must not be proper to it, because I have not been able to heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor that has come to that.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black cholera some times, and then bleed that, if it is found manifest repletion.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is located with operation, and then prohibit in the tract incisions which are due to that; and then concave of all part with the good codena meticulous examination until no remaining cause of the roots of it. And let the blood run, and do not cut that lightly, and express the places, and absorb the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which is to you possible of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flow of the blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydropic.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropic of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of hypoarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydropic tympanistres with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if to the patient already is achieved weakness, or is in that other illness other hydropic, as if it is in it cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in it there is no other illness but hydropic so only, and not child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then express the belly of it with his hand, expel the water to the part below the navel, and then take spatula spines according to this form:
be of two parts acute long, of acute extremity as spatula; but however be in it some shortness small by small, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
And consider if the generation of hydrops is from the bowels, for when you have the section you are three fingers away from the navel on the right side over the pubic bone.
But if the generation of hydrops is from the disease of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right.
And do not have your section be on the side where the patient wants to make the incision, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument the entire flesh, and then introduce yourself into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the flesh and the skin, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of a fingernail or about.
And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the place you want, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or lead or tin, to which in the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, thus as sometimes:
And in the extremity of it most superior is an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately rises on the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the hour a quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than what is allowed in the hour, very soon the patient will die from the resolution of his animal spirit, or you will bring upon him a five-pointed star which is approaching death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what they signify to you the dispositions of the patient from the virtue of his pulse and from the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause for as soon as it is retained by the flesh which retains the hole that is on the skin of it and recommence to you that you pierce it according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates water, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do water for some days with fear, and guard yourself from error so that it does not remain of the water but little.
But if you fear about the patient, and let out of the water a large quantity, then cure that with burial in fine sand, and move him to a bath, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter .lv.
Of the cure of the children who are born with the places of the urine unpierced.
Sometimes some of the children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixtion is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore it is necessary to repair with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then place in the hole a small lead nail and ligate that, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate, it is regurgitated and urinated; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is already possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not let this clear.
But that of which the hole is straight be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, are ledged, the cause for as those, that which is born and the hole is due to the end of the head of the vagina so that it cannot urinate to the parts of it, until it elevates the vagina with its hand to the parts above; and it is not to its generation, for so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in it is that the patient be turned over on their back, and then extend the head of the vagina of it with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscise the head of the head of the vagina from the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is incision of a feather, or that you do not shave any part, so that the middle of it comes similar to the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place as it is necessary.
And guard yourself in your operation of flux of blood, for many times accidents happen there; and pause to it with water that you have abstained the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albation of which happens in the prepucii in the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepucii of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albation happens in the vagina and it is a prominence of bad flesh.
And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, however, which you suspend with a fine thread and cut that which is within that world; and then place over that root submerged in Egyptian poultice; and then, cure it with a diaphana poultice while it is healing.
And if it is malignant, of a leg color, then you must administer a cautery near its incision and its root.
But if the ulcer is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must treat the part that is inside at the beginning while it is consolidating; and then you treat the outside one, because when you treat the inside one at the same time as the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be contaminated.
And if there are accidents in the genitals and foreskin, blackness and corruption, then you must remove all that which is already damaged and that which is about to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then apply a layer on that with honey, which is mixed with flour of the rind of millet and of herbs, crushed and sifted.
And then treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because the cautery is useful in two situations at once, so it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in those who the foreskin is theirs, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens due to plague or abscess) you must excoriate with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, very easily is perforated by its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of silk, which is already moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with a vi stiptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of those who happen to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: but since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those who are children, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and the easier way that is lost to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the reason for which is that I have found the majority of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and with torers; and they use a ligature with a thread and an incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and have not found better purification with scissors, with a ligature with a thread than in purification with the nail, because many times the thread escapes the lower part, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains deeper, and very easily it is forced to another incision and sure pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the cobblers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because very easily it enters into the tract of it.
But in the operation with the nail, very easily it breaks iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown to me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharpnesses, and you incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is of those who understand a little, that you do nothing but that you tie the thread in his penis only, and that you leave it there for another day.
And then make him happy in all that manner that is possible to you of what receives his intelligence. And then make him lie between your arms, prepared, and do not be seen; and hide the scissors in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the rectum and blow into the anus, and pull that until the head of the rectum emerges, and then modify that which is attached to it of filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let the one pair of extremities be non-cutting and the other pair be cutting, so that the handle of the key does not come out, and the length of the two sharp points is like the length of two equal handles.
But the error in modification is that if the intestine is forced out of the anus entirely, or part of it, the incision must be made.
Therefore, as you extend that with your fingernail before the abscess of the area and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a hook and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and what is swollen remains below the rectum as an abscess, then you let that inside until the abscess is softened, and exfoliate that with facility, and cut that according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the rectum, because it would not be good for it.
And therefore cure this with the water that the plague consolidates of the powders that we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is cut from the anus beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, that does not hurt it.
And but cure this with the water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made by a stone or by congealed blood, or by a tumor or by a carbuncle, and similar to those of water that we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have said, and the cause is very violent on the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be a subtle lion's cone, as well as a pipe of bird's bone with the subtlety of a long ray in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle pipe at the head of it.
And the manner of the emission of urine by this is that you take the double thread and tie it in the middle of it wool or thread for good binding; and insert the extremities of the thread into the part below of the syringe, and cut with the forceps if there are any superfluities of the wool, but introduce it into the pipe with force, and then insert the syringe with border and with album of cow.
And make the patient lie on his back, and lubricate his bladder and rectum with oiled water, olive oil, and water.
And then insert the syringe with facility until it reaches the bottom of the rectum; and then double the rectum above to the belly button; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient be reached by the cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes in tortuosity.
And then extend the thread with the wool little by little, because the urine will soak the wool.
Then extract that and make for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do water and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clamps and similar instruments which are according to water.
When it happens in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or congealed blood in that, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want in that to distill waters and medicines, then it is made with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is the form of it:
But that in the extremity of it is deaf, so it is closed. And in that there are three towels: two from one side, so many times.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which is that which is called, and as much as it is filled, it is added, until when any cause is drawn from those humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what is done with a clamp that is used to extract naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to prevent humors from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humor, and draw with it the liquid that is expelled to the upper parts, so that the humor is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the urethra as we have recounted in the tongue; and then expel the humor with it, so that that humor goes to the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Form of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or lead, of which the head must be like a small feather, and below it a channel is threaded.
And then take the bladder of the patient, and place in it the humor that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligation with a silk thread, and heat that humor over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the structure descent until the patient feels that that humor has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that with all its roundness; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then join the circle so that it is joined to the soft part, because you place in it the liquid that you want from the humors, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humor reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of a stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is located in the bladder.
And I am narrating this with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his urethra, and often it pains, and then it is straightened; and with that, the anus is felt in many of those.
And it is easier the healing of the children of that than those who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult healing in the old. But in the young it is milder because it is among those.
And of that one of which the stone is larger and the healing is easier; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with the catheter which extracts all the wound which is in their bowels; because that wound sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and the investigation of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and have them sit and moan in order that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what jumps from there or sometimes.
And then make that cushion between your hands prepared, and the hands of it be below the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the lower parts.
And then push that and all of that forcefully.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately take care with a section over it.
And if you don't get all of it with your touch, then you must cover with oil the tip of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the tip of the middle if it is a young complete one, and insert that into their anus. And push the stone until it is below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your said, and expel that to the outside parts before the place where you have the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand re-molds the vagina which is below the genitals, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then insert a spatula well incident of which this is the form of it: and cut in it the liquid that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, down to the left side of the vagina; and let the section be over that stone and your said be in the anus, and let it be made transversely, so that the section outside be wide and inside narrower according to the quantity that comes out of the stone be possible, and no more, because strongly compresses your said which is in the anus the stone and it is thrown out of its faculty.
And know that of the foot there is one which has an angle and margins, so that the healing of it is made difficult by this.
And of that one, this is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light healing.
Therefore if it is that one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus formed, then cover that with something, or that which you strengthen upon that with a gentle gesture, the extremity of which is like a file with which you strengthen upon the foot, and do not let it escape; or that which you introduce, having left it an instrument of subtle curved extremity.
But if you cannot upon that, then you enlarge the tract a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off that with strength with vitriol trissated.
But if the foot is more than one, then at the beginning you push the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then you cut upon it; and then you push a little near to it; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if it is a very large foot, then ignorance is that you cut it with a large section, for you cause the patient one of two evils: either it dies or it brings about a continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not fully consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is formed, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps while you extract that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with essences of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that after the abscess is cut.
And then turn the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you have untied it, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure it with diaphyticon and diabazilicon gargle until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess, caustic, and corrosive, and of that semblance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for this the urine is forbidden (and this is known by the egress of blood in urine), then therefore introduce your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to every kind, with that which you convene to it of the cure until it is healed.
And cover in the hours of all the cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed upon the place.
And if the foot is small and is in the middle of the groin, and is fixed in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure this with water which I recommend before you arrive at the section, for troops of times by this cure it is accused of section; and I have already spoken of this, and it is that you take a steel drill, of which this is the form of it:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with it the groin below the foot so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then introduce the iron into the groin, perforating with facility until the drill comes to that foot. And revolve the drill with your hand in that foot little by little, and you pierce the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand upon that which is broken of the foot from the side of the groin, for that is broken, and it is formed with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your disposal for any reason which prohibits you from that, then tie a thread below the foot, and another thread above the foot. And then cut upon the foot in that groin between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligature and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the foot, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is untied, the code returns to its place and covers the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above, that you raise the code to the parts above, or that you return it to your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the Extraction of Foot from Women.
Foot in women is rarely engendered.
But if a foot is seen in any of those, then difficult is the cure of it, and it is prohibited by troops of manners.
One of them is that the woman, strong, is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well acquainted who describes herself to the physician when she is chaste, or is of the women having husbands.
The third thing is that you have not brought a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth thing is that the place of the incision on the hip in women is farther away from the place of the hip, because you should make a shallow incision, and there is fear in that.
But if necessity compels you to do so, then when you take a female doctor who knows well, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman matron who is well-versed in the ways of women, or a woman who in this art has part of the art.
Therefore do that, and command her to do all that you tell her, from the inquiry about the hip to the beginning; the reason for which is that she should regard if the woman is a virgin, then she should put her finger in her anus and want the hip.
Therefore, if you find that, force that, and then command her to insert herself on that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the hip, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehend that with good understanding.
Therefore, if you find that, then command her to gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until she reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert herself on that position of the majority of the vagina at the root of the vagina, from whichever part she is stopped and feel the hip in that part, and the finger of her should not be removed from the hip, short of her.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray on that incision, and if she feels the hip, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which she knows that the hip is thrown from that.
And know that the species of hips are many: for some are small and large, and long and rough, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species are of it by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissat and place that for an hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the hip is thrown out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments the ones which are said in the extraction of the hip in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you place powder on the place and strengthen that with poultices and stricture descent, and do not iterate that; and leave the hip and do not extract that, because very soon the patient will die. And then care for the wound.
Therefore, when the acuity of the blood is ceded after a few days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the hip is thrown out.
Chapter LXII.
Of incision about hernia.
Hernia ayguoza is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the huou, and it is called the ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared nature in the part of the huou, until it is cuyat that already is another huou; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which happens to the genitals, because to those is poured this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this moisture is having many colors, because the color of it is either declining to citrine or to sanguine, or rouge, or it is black and slimy, or it is whitish and watery, and this is what is most.
And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water is there: because if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is round, declining a little in length as if the figure of the huou, and appear the genitals, because the moisture contains that of all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round in the part of the huou and by this one estimates that it is another huou.
And if the moisture is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then it catches below the centiment.
And since you want the knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you probe the color of the moisture in the abscess with a pointed instrument of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the instrument, judge of what is inside of it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then we command the patient to be flebbotomized if that is possible to you, and times the body of him full.
And then be resuspended on his back upon some cause a little high, and place below him many cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, the one extending his rag to one of two sides to the groin of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a broad spatula and split the groin of the genitals from the middle place along the length up to the pubic bone.
And the section is made according to rectum evenly distant from the line that goes through the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white cyph which comprehends.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure that; and your scraping with which you scrape by a part of the flesh that it may be suspended with the most and most subtlely scrutinize with the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible to you.
And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with a hook, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the groin comprising, and incise the bladder in that manner that is to you possible. And incise that with its entirety or in pieces, and mostly its subtle side, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made secure that the water does not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its groin in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, return it inwards, and then adjust the two labia of the groin of the genitals with suture, and then care for it thus as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the fluid is corrupted by another malady, then when you lie the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then care for it with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts at once, then know that two are the hernias; therefore incise that part according to that which you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it is an operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place above cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then let two cloths be taken and be humpled with carded wool according to this semblance; and let the extremities with which it is pressed of cloth or of damp wool be made, and let them be added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the anus inside to the two, and the second presses to the part of the pubic bone, and two extremities over two thighs and two other extremities over two groins, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and that you incise with that the groin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to that which we have recounted until it is discovered the white cyph containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cyph, and it is ignited until all the humidity is thrown out.
And then extend the cyph with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to that which is to you possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself of the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than operation with section.
But if to you makes contrariety abscess caut in the time of section or in the time of cautery, or flow of blood, then when you cure that contrariety that makes to you by that, with cure that convenes to him according to that which is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not await the second operation for its horror, then when it is certified you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery, administer perforation according to that which we have recounted here;
Then when you must do that, make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be wide until all the water runs out.
And then place on the spot cloth and tie that and leave that, so that the remaining of the water runs. And then care for that until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is in the emission of the water in that hour you pierce that: and this is not done except for that because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then when you put in the wound a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the aperture of the wound a little.
And know that the water returns, and it is heated for about six months or near those; and when it is heated, then it is perforated according to that same manner, so that the patient will pass his days thus.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and the cure of it.
Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of losing to harm in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And I am remembering the operation in that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: either by acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not abated in it pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And very hard is the abscess solidified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And some times it is done by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflation of those so that already it is perceived the recollection of it, or by the inflation of veins.
But that which is by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and do not cover that which you touch.
But that which is done by the inflation of the vein is not dispersed of it any cause of you the compression with the fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species a section may be made and on the other flesh; and it is that you cut the chain of the genitals, and then extend the bowel to the parts below, and extract that from the white cap, and deliver the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspender more than you deliver that from all parts of the bowel.
Therefore, if the bowel is already among those flesh consolidated, then you must extract the bowel and incise it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the cap, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it by a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the bowel as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the belly.
It is an abscess enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking over the patient.
And in the cure of this illness it is by fear of that of which it is preceded recollection.
However, it must be said that an operation is done in it according to that which I did the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on a raised stretcher; and then pull the suspenders of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the chain of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then incise with a broad acute spatula by a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate from all parts as we have said in the extraction of the artery which is in the temples.
And then place in those a needle which is double-pointed, and tie that in the first of the places where you have incised the vit, and tie that other time in the back of them. And then incise those in the middle place by a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is gathered of the fetid and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you wish to be generated healed so that the vessels which nourish one of the genitals, for it is not harmful for that.
But if it happens that vit is found in all the vessels, then you must either extract the testicles or that the testicles are tied by those vessels, so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they are stabilized, or tied so that it is not helpful to those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that ends in the cap extended over the belly of the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, for that descending the bowels of that rupture to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the cap or of the excision of it, and these two species happen for many causes: either by percussion, or by sautz, or by clamor, or by elevation of any heavy cause, or by semblance.
And the sign of that, when it is by the extension of the cap, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and it does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within the ves the preon for so that the cap compre the bowel.
And the sign of him is when it is by section of the shaft, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is a diverse abscess appearing after the codename proper appears, and this is by the protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it to the sides of the shaft.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine the cloth, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal fissure, and here it is retained, and this is a great harm to the patient, and sometimes it makes the pain worse and more intensely when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the kinds of this illness with iron there is fear, because whoever is to be avoided the hunting in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the sides of its cavity if he obeys its return, and then it is reversed over his belly between his hands, and elevate his legs.
And then stitch the cord which separates the cord of the testicles to the sides below, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely along; and then fix in two lips of the section with pins as you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the amount that to you is possible that of that the  huou be forgotten.
And then excoriate that shaft which is after the cord of the testicles, until the white hard shaft of each part is discovered.
Now you introduce your finger into that which is the testicle, into that which is between the white shaft, which is after the cord of the huou, and between the shaft second, and dissolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the huou.
And then with your hand the cord of the testicles to the sides below, and in this way extend the white shaft upwards with your left hand, and elevate the huou with the shaft to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the huou upwards and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind with a complete solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard shaft. But if you find of it any cause, then you enpelleys that to the belly after.
And then cut in the part after the cord of the testicles by section of which blood runs and heals as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and sometimes the white shaft is cauterized, which we have said near the incision for fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the ligament until by itself it falls.
But if the hunting of it is late, then of water cold be embroiled, and place over it until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  a wind hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen that has been daring on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the disruption that is made in the ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and emerges the place.
And do not allow the genitals any cause of the intestines in the genitals; and if they allow, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if it is prolonged the time with that, it is adjusted a fissure in the shaft until it descends the intestine in the shaft; and occurs that by the extension of the shaft which is in the ankles as we have said, which cause is that the shaft is extended, and then it is softened and the place is an abscess and emerges.
And the cure of him is by cautery as it has been narrated before.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dries the area of the rupture of the boils with a section according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the loincloth until it is uncovered.
And then take the iron and place it over the prominent area of the cloth, and press it to the front of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent places on the extremity of the iron of the cloth, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the iron, and do not cut the cloth at all, nor extend the wound, nor other cause as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the wounds, and as you incised the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the cloth is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of the softening of the scrotum.
Sometimes the scrotum of some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is felt by looking at it.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked for the cure of it that he make the patient lie on his back, and cut all the softened scrotum over the natural scrotum; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for a reason it is written to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which one is that it be in the knowledge of the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we have many times need of castration of other animals for our benefit, such as of many, and of goats, and of pigs, and of those similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be submerged in warm water until its genitals are softened and are limp and hanging. And then take them with your hand until they are soft and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, when you have the beast and press the scrotum of it with your left hand.
And then lie the suspensory, and cut over each wound with a section between two wounds processed.
And then cut those that you will have each excoriated. And do not let on those of the cloth any cause, but the thin cloth which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition firmly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that it appears in that which sees the space in the scrotum of testicles, in which one figure with a cunh of woman in which it lies.
And sometimes from that comes urine the which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman over the pentil is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished at the front part as the perpucii of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that when you cut those tight flesh until the pus of it escapes, and then that you cure them with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men of which you see urine the which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lenting is very often adjusted due to natural causes while it is stretched and made less noticeable; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads as in men and interferes with intercourse.
Therefore, you must have the superfluity of the intestine with your hand or with a hook and incisions.
And in the last incision, mostly in the front of the root, so that no flow of blood occurs.
And then care for that with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
May flesh born is flesh that is born in the horror of the mother before it is full, and forth it is brought to the parts before according to the semblance of the tail (and therefore the first call this "disease caused"); therefore, when we cut it like we cut the intestine, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is when the cone of the woman is not perforated, or the tract is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to the illness that preceded, and that is made either by flesh not well fitted or by a fine or thick cicatrix.
And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibits  coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examining the uterus, if the opening is apparent, properly; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the opening is by a fine cicatrix, and it is proper to the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you place on the two labia powder, and then place your fingers indicated of both the masses at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force until that fine cicatrix is broken and the opening is open.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the location, and keep it with a cloth during the day so that the cut location does not solidify.
But if the cicatrix is thick and thick, then when you cut it with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
But if the opening is by carnation, then suspend that with a hook, and cut it.
And be with you the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood by biting, such as hacathia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with album of egg.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plague is not consolidated lightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calgua of the lily.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's nativity of other flesh, and then when you cut according to this manner. But if this is by a  carbuncle, the carbuncle which is in the mother not be made contrary with iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that happens in the cone of the women.
Hemorrhoids so appear from the orifices of many veins within which of those corro blood continuously; and as so old hemorrhoids and are made theyls.
And already I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the feeling, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother on which cats feeling, are those that are cured.
And that you put the woman in a good position and then extend the tail with the scissors, or with a rough cloth, and cut those with the roots.
And then pulverize over those of the blood flow of one of the cutting powders by biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then enpellesca her feet for an hour, and then put that in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that sezer in decoction of suma and of the skins of millegrains and of walnuts and of similar.
And then take flour of barley and comfiys that with honey and wine and make a poultice with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is abscindit, it is good; and if not, make adhere to two ventozas, and to the nipples their escarification.
And then take wool and submerge that with juice of cilantro or with juice of arnica or with juice of guaravera with wine tinted and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with ointments until it is healed.
And take care of him while he is healing.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the perforation of the eyssedura that occurs in the mother.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the mother, as well as boils and abscesses,  and ulcers, and buboes, and carbuncles, and fistulas, hemorrhoids, and boils, and other abscesses. And I have already said these ailments and the kinds of them and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And now I say in this treatise of an abscess that comes in the mother when it is of the abscesses that collesce heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catches on that feeling, then do not cut it with perforation, and take care of it with that which helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then have you make the woman lie on a bed that has two beds; and recline on her two and adjust her feet to the part further from the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with a bandage to that which is convenient.
And then the midwife follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the mother is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be made afterwards.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray on the perineum of the mother of the woman, and that which from the instrument enters into the mother not be more than the perineum and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the perineum of the mother, then have you place powders on the texture of the perineum of the mother so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instruments in the perineum of the mother.
And have you place the vertigue that runs in the instrument of the side that is above and that the minister have the instrument and revolve the vertigue until the orifice of the mother is opened.
And as the excision appears, and is touched with the hand and is lean and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And as the sania is evacuated, then have you place in the wound a mesh submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which there be some stippidity; and place the calca7 in the section in the perineum of the mother.
And place deforo the mother and on the pentenilh clean wool submerged in water in which there be boiled malvas.
And then be cured after two days with rinsing which convenes to that within until it is healed.
And some times is washed the mother and the wound in such a way that it is cristarised with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled rhizome of liri or of aristologia longua, and then returns to the rinsing.
And if the wound is deinted in the mother ameguada, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have cure that with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are according to a non-natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth by the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing at the parts behind and desires to smell the air, and above that it is relieved by that which is above her of the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it on its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then have you compress the belly of her so that the embryo descends lightly, and when they descend on their head, they give to it the second one, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this part is non-natural and non-laudable, because when the embryo is emitted on its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it, i.e., or is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its collar, and similar to the figures of it non-laudable.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I have shown all the figure of those, and what kind of engine is in those by so that it be signified by that and be stood upon that.
When the feyt is emitted on its head by natural egress, and that is vehement on the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fennel coy and with humid oils.
And then insert the metronome between their two small shoulder blades and open it with that, or pierce it with your nail until you drain what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly while she pushes the fetus.
But if she does not push, then make the woman drink a mixture of  ptillium and fenugreek with water.
And then command her, the one who is giving birth, to be compressed and make that  movement with conditions; and keep her mouth and nose closed for one hour, so that the fetus is expelled quickly.
And if the two hands of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then make them return those little by little with ease. But if she does not obey the movement, then place the woman on a  pallet and raise her legs, and then shake the pallet on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
And if the hands are not brought back and the fetus dies, then cut those open and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to your hand with cloth and extract it with equality, so that it is expelled.
When the fetus lies on its feet, then make you push those upwards, and then turn the little fetus, and then make it equal, and then take one foot of it and extend those little by little.
But when it is born between the thighs, then command her to express herself, and make that movement with conditions, so that it will be expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recounted, then return the little fetus little by little until you place it back in its natural position, so that it will be expelled then with easier movement.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take a mixture of althea and dissolved gum, and pound everything in the mortar with a good percussion, and then line with that the woman's vulva, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that  cauterize in boiling water, until it reaches the  hypochondria.
And when the parts of her are softened, then make her inhale smoke of myrtle and place that under her. And when she has inhaled the smoke for an hour, then make her lie on a pallet, and then make that movement and extend her mouth, and take that out, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, so that the fetus is expelled quickly.
Way of the fetus lying laterally with one of its hands. Be gentle in reducing the limb, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go.
And if she cannot go, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement shaking, and then administer ointments as I have and recounted of mucillages.
And if the childbirth has come, then make her lie on a pallet, and then study over the reduction of the limb, and turn the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman move and command her to compress herself until she is expelled.
Way of the fetus lying on its back with its arms and the fascia of it on the side of its mother. Make the midwife have the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and make it so with ease.
And as it is and when it is turned, and then place on her vulva what we have recounted of oil and mucillages.
And then command her to push little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a pallet and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to compress herself; and make that movement with conditions. Exit of the fetus prepared on the side.
When the mother's horrifics are expelled in this manner, consider, and then make an incision with your nail into the second one until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then make an incision in the belly button, so that it is not held back and dies.
And then gently push the patient's feet to the sides while you hold that second cloth, and tell the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and the sir should be gently pushed out, if God wills.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four, but this is strange and difficult; but it comes from nature, and not from life.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, a second time, and they are separated by the cap, distinguish those among the ligament in the navel of each of those, and sometimes they are born like this as if it were one fetus by gentle natural movement, and they are born sometimes by unnatural movement as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult, some of them, in childbirth, and they come to what we have said of unnatural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with facility and subtlety, and with tardiness, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the engineer bringing to health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it has already been verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to ten, the cause of which was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this covers what should be in the science of the midwife, for great learning is given to that person who seems to resemble this, and therefore, pause is given to that as it should be.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine, and it is not born outside, and you are forced to use the operation with your hand, then you should consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents by which she is feared for destruction.
Then you should place the woman on her back on the bed, and her head should be inclined downwards, and her legs should be elevated.
And the minister should have those of two parts, or be tied on the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oils and with a mucilage of althea and fenugreek and the seed of lily.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she introduces her hand with facility into the mother, and then she seeks with the hand the place in which the hooks will be in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore, you consider if the fetus is prepared that it descends upon its head, and then you place the hooks in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or below the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or below the hypochondria.
But if the descent is on the feet of it, then in the penile, or in the middle of the back.
And you should have the hook with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and introduce your hand with facility and place the hook in one of those places which we have said, until you arrive at the left cause.
And then pause and place in the position of it another hook, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not an extension according to its rectitude alone.
And be careful to every part, so that the movement of it is alleviated as it is done during the eradication of it.
And be sure in it that which is between them, the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them skillfully and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is born, then the hooks should be changed into the place which is more outward; and do so until the whole fetus is born.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then the midwife should wrap a cloth over it; and then extract it until the whole is born, and incise it either at the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so you should do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it constriction in the movement, or there is water adjusted in the head of it, then the midwife should introduce between the fingers the spatula spines and fenda the head and extract the water, or that which disfigures it with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next.
And similarly, if the bone is broken in a large place by nature, and then the bone is inserted into the flesh, or the bone is nourished as we have said; then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is broken and is constricted by the collarbone, then it is cut so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor does it obey easily, then you cut the head as much as is possible to you.
And if the bowels of the belly are festering or are in it hydrophic, then you must pierce it so that the moisture which is in it runs out.
But if the matter is on their feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the foot, then you must extract that cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and that you cut the belly and the foot so that the water which is in those runs out.
But if the other members are stayed and the head returns, then the metron inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then she inserts her hand into the preon of the lair, and searches with that the head, and pulls that into the mouth of the mother, and then inserts into it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess caused by a boil, then it is necessary that it not be troubled over it; but you must administer an infusion of moist, fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the matter is on their side, then if possible, it should be lanced; and it should be administered with the water we have said in the living matter.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
And you must leave no cause of the second kind.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer the water we have said of the cure for the abscesses caused by the mother.
And if there occurs a flow of blood, then descend into astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom a child was dead, and then above that fire another pregnancy, and then the dead child is another. It happened to me a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated so that it was open, and it began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague did not consolidate.
Then I placed upon him some causes of plaster of strong traction, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing some days, and extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I continued to investigate the plague, and extracted from it more bones, the woman existing in her thousands of dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, correcting of it a little of pus.
And I do not affirm that it is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the physician artificially administers with his hand for cure.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the verge with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the stretcher in which the free ends are fastened, to which fastening there are two verges in two extremities of two feet. But however this verge must be more subtle of stricter, and be made either of ebony or of wood of boys.
And it should be the width of each rod two fingers and the margin of each one is one finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two rods are two adjustments of that same half rods, of which the length is the majority of a palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two addaments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed verges.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ebony or wood rods according to the resemblance of forceps. But however at the extremity of it there are two addaments as it were, and the length of those addaments is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want with those to open the mother, then you make the woman lie on the sheet with her feet hanging, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, similarly according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the metron makes it as you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients said:
The form of impelling which is pushed by the foot:
The form of amisadat2 which is contained in the great head
And it is assembled like forceps, whose teeth are at the extremity, sometimes like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes like this, whose teeth are like the teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. Form of amisadat few:
Form of an unci having a spine:
Form of an unci having two spines:
Form of a spatum having two extremities with which the head is abscindit:
Form of two spatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and when most are multiplied the species of that and are prepared by the artificers, as much as it is lighter to their operation and more aut of by the men for their quantity.
And in the works of those instruments already whatever it is of by you must be prepared, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, then you command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that stirnuation with condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of her and over her nostrils, and if by this it is outside, it is good.
And if not, then you take a bowl and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs inside the mouth of the mother, like calamint and rue and anise and chamomile and sicados arabic and cinnamon and centaury. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and place that over the fire.
And then place a canula of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stirnuation as we have said, and the secondine is thrown out with speed.
But if this cure remains and it is not thrown out, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the conh and caress with that the secondine, and as that has been found, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the preon of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the secondine, extract it little by little according to the rectum so that the mother does not feel the traction vehemently. And be careful that it be changed to the right and left sides with facility.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with stirnuation and with the medication of the bowl with herbs.
But if it is not thrown out with all the causes that we have recommended, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue yourself over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is emitted from it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cloyssa of the woman, and then sterilize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it rot then after a few days and it will be dissolved and it will be thrown out.
But when you can, it is elevated from it bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that you read the patient; and therefore it should be administered sub-fumiguacios and convenient to that.
But some of the Ancients already are esproatz sub-fumigation of nazitort and of dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated ofves the retention of menstruation and of the secondine:
It is made of veyre or of eram.
And it is placed the subtle extremity in the conh and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And hold that inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of cure of the unperforated child's bottom.
Many children are born and the bottoms of them are not perforated, the ones that already have a subtle and opilated ciphac. Therefore it behooves the midwife to perforate with her said that ciphac; and if not, perforate that with a sharp spatum, and guard yourself that it does not touch the lacert.
And then place on that wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure that with enguent inside until it is senat.
But if you fear that it is opilated, then place in the trauc a canula for many days, and remove it when the child will want to degir.
And already accideys oppilacio of the bottom by consolidation of plague or of apostema; therefore it behooves that that consolidation be incised, and then be cured with that which we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of the cure of fistulas that have opened.
Fistulas that have opened in the parting of the buttocks, low with discharge and thickness, which have opened near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or a multitude of fistulas.
And as that nodularity is ancient and runs with the moisture of white, viscous, or subtle pus, and sometimes from these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them by the outflow and by the windiness; and sometimes the patient feels the outflow, and very often it is emitted from them worms.
And sometimes from these fistulas some penetrate into the space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the knot of the groin.
And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you enter a subtle probe of thread or iron into the fistula when there is no turgescence.
But if there is turgescence, then enter into that a subtle probe of lead or of horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor does it proceed from the tract any cause of evacuation or worms or windiness, thus as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the signification of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it as that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the groin and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe enters here if there is no turgescence into the groin, and causing pain in the circuit of the parting; and that from it there is pus always; and that it is not of value in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the physicians upon which it is founded.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and what I have already proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their two, and raises their legs into them, the thighs being inclined to their belly, and then enter a probe of lead, or of thread if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe enters.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that you enter your finger inside the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself enters uncovered, or another that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medicine by which healing is expected in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and enter that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those flesh adjusted to the fistula have been seared, which are similar to the feather quill of a bird.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until they can all those flesh that are seared, and then cure that with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, good is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is veiled with flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the pudendum, then dry the pudendum from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying by the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place in which the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe it is liberated and catched.
And then purify those fistula flesh which are assembled to the feather quill of a bird and do not remain any cause from those.
But if a flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are cauterizing those flesh, then the best that is and of the lighter instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good twice habits: it is the searing of those flesh adjusted, and abscessing of the blood excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in a caus trissat until the place gets braced, and then cure the plague with enemas of hard flesh generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is stypticity and excretion; when then it is restored already healed and you fear no iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the preon of the buttock and is elongated from that to the surface of the body, then enter your finger into the buttock and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the tension and between you and her is a veil of cloth or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on her, but according to your trust and hope.
This cause is administered in her in three ways: or that you cauterize her as we have said; or that you succeed her inside while you obtain the cavity of her so that it is possible for you to introduce the instruments and the proper cure; and do not process it with a section so that you do not cut the ligament containing the tail, and that it occurs on the patient as an effect of the will of the spirit; and then cure her with what we have said, which is a strong and safe healing; or that you lengthen that veil and cleanse that pus that dries her inside towards the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulous flesh that are in the section inside where you can make a percuction; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole wound with a section, and if the pus orifice above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and pus is light for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the place of the anus around the surface of the body with the tendon and on the edge of the anus, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the hearts according to this form:
And introduce it into that faithful envelope of v threads or around them; and then introduce the probe with a thread into the fistula until you obtain its cavity.
But if it is penetrating in the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the thread from that tract so that you introduce your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two extremities simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you see the thread more deeply inserted into the flesh, tighten well that inside so that those flesh that are between the two extremities of the thread and that close.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, but not in the preon, because it is not you who should do this so that you do not cut the ligament; and then make it with that inside so that it is healed.
The form of the spatum spinos with which the fistula is fended: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is blunt, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suturing hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, because they are between the anus resembling this way that they are of carbs, or that those are like the fat of rasim. And of those are small and large, and that the blood runs from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however those that are outside the anus are according to the less humidity, of which runs a little yellow water or a little blood with continuous body, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to squat and to express himself until the anus is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your fingernail, and then cut those deeply their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those by the humidity of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with a wool fleece, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and pulverize over them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are applied to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the egress, then christenize the patient with a christer in which is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and that obeys the egress lightly when the patient expresses himself.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your fingernail, or that you take those with a hook, and cut those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that one who has an incision, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take thread enveloped and introduce it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and envelop the two extremities of the thread in the part below the needle, and it is longitudinally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then untie the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of them untied, so that the superfluity of the blood runs from that one.
And then place on the anus cloth infused in rose oil or in cerot; and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave that one inside that box; and when it is closed, cure those with ointments or another cure inside that box.
And since they are old and do not heal in that medicine, then when you cut those with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they are made moist and the discharge of pus from them is hosted, which prohibits them from consolidating; and then cure those when they are consolidated.
Then you must open those with a strong pus that the first one when it is blood and is excoriated; and then cure those when they are healed.
Know that alamermar, it is clear, and it is not if not a red spot according to the color of the body resembling a keyhole, and it is made in the whole body and mostly in the parts below the feet and the knees, and therefore by those pains you must know the ailment.
And therefore, when it is incised that which is in the circuit of the key, and it is held with the forceps or a pincer, and it is eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize the following as it is preceded in its chapter.
But of warts is a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and many times they come in the most of the children.
And the cure of it is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or a needle inside that box. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
But a formica is a small eminence, feutrada or fistulous, thick on the surface of the body going into the preon, and when the  freg finds that it is felt in it resembling a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is that you take a tube of eagle feather or of vulture feather, and it is strong, and you place that over the formica until it contains the circle of the tube from the parts of it; and then you revolve your hand with the tube until you cut that which is in the circuit of the formica, and you place that in the preon of the flesh, and that you eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a tube of iron or of steel according to this form:
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn to a subtlety, deaf (so it is not pierced), enveloped so that over the finger the apprehension of it be abolished and the revolution of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter of cauterization.
On the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christening is done of silver or of laton or of iron melted or malleated; and sometimes it is done of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, that that which is administered in the cure of the little children be small; and of those whose buttocks are raw or sore, the christenings of those be small.
The form of christening large and few:
The head of the tube of it above in which the bag is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it distinction the one where the bag is tied as often.
And the extremity of it below, which is entered into the anus, be deaf (so it is not opened) much like a lion, drawing to a subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more thick a little.
And be the bag in which be placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then introduce into those holes a strong thread of cru thread which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinctions with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, that it be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be supine on his back, and elevate his legs up and place below him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cauter with oil or with album of egg or with mucilage of fennel or of the like; and then introduce that into the anus with facility, and then the minister presses the bag and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated in the bowel all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, he should have as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it all night, he is more likely to recover.
If you treat him for the ailments of a solution of the belly and his vomiting, then you repeat the cautery until he is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or festering sores, then the cautery should be very subtle and lion-like, of the cauteries with which children are cauterized.
Of the cure of plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues what was convenient to the free, and I say so the cure of those with my hand and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place on which they fall.
And the causes by which many times plagues are made are such as a bite of a snake, or an incision of a sword or spear, or a blow with a lance, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as a plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the others.
And I will begin with the plagues of the head, for the remembrance of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a snakebite or similar, and the wound has already been cleansed alone and it is a large plague and you fear an abscess forming on that patient's head, then you should cauterize and perform cephalic flebotomy immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue, if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the plague is little.
And let the flebotomy be on the opposite side of the afflicted area; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy foods.
But if from the ministration any cause prohibits, then let the food be lessened and do not approach meat nor wine.
And place on the plague, if an abscess forms, cauterize, and infuse into it olive oil roasted alone or into wine in which is steeped.
But if it is certain of an abscess cauterize, then place on the plague, if it is recent and the air has not changed that, the powder which I will recount a little later.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on alum, until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or is from an incision of a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by puss, then adjust those with suture according to how I will recount of the suture of them.
But if the plague is already discovered from the bone and skin, and it is not a retention of it but a small suspension, then incise that and then cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in the place of the wound, and command the patient to be careful of foods in which there is greasiness: caps and form cooked meat and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if a putrefaction occurs in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that pus and throw it out, and then cure that.
But if in these plagues an artery or vein is found from which blood can flow, and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that un-incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or cut it; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is severed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter;  in this way that you pulverize on those this powder, for it consolidates before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part, dragon's blood, two parts, and non-extinct cautery, three parts; be all three ground and sifted, and from it, fill the plague, and be it constricted by good constriction until it well adheres on that, and be coagulated with blood.
And then strengthen that with poultices and leave it, and do not untie it while it is like this so that it is not apostemed, for no medicine is extracted from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do this solely cauterize, when it is not to you in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is necessary that it be laid upon them and be constricted, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summertime, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, in this way that you place on those some digested unguents, or that you place on those dust of barley flour with water and honey until they get a poultice; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if it happens to the plague fracture in bones, and it is small, then you extract it with a tool.
And I will say the cure for fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague happens in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if already the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place but that its cure be avoided with that which makes vehement clotting, such as zinc and zeger that is vitriol and similar to their quills no to the nerves and against that. And do not place on the plague any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that is cured with light medicines, such as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in rose or non-rose oil, and then washed with sweet water and the other pebbles minced in this manner, and moistened.
But if the plague is large, then administer suture, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if to the plague is depth or happens in it to the lowest part of the wound, then perforate that in the most depressed place.
But if in the plague already is incised artery and is obtained flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessity provokes to that.
But if already has incised the vertebrae of the throat or all, and are saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the chain with suture over the tube of the throat and do not touch that; raise that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with decent structure, and leave that for some days; and then cure that with poultices in which is clotting and excitation until it is healed.
But if the plague already in the bone has made a breach, then strike that, and if in it there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can of them; and that which to you is not apparent, leave that until the plague is healed, and it is separated and the discharge of it is alleviated.
And if the plague is recent then pulverize on that powder which is recommended to you. But if in the plague is made a fistula, then cure that with that of which the recollection will come later in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or from a sword, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the plague there is windiness when the patient groans; then you know that the plague is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the plague is recent with its blood, then you put on it in the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that it is not the blood retained in the depth of it and that returns to the heart and that kills the patient, but put on it attractive poultice, and unwrap that twice a day.
And if the poultice is not to you present, then you put on the orifice of the plague cotton old so that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it runs that which is in it adjusted.
But if already from the plague have passed three days or more and does not happen to the patient spasm nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the belly, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already is made a fistula; cure therefore that by its chapter.
And if the plague is by incision of a spear or of a sword, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with that which is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already has made a breach in the bone, and already from it are incised pieces, then you turn the plague and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the plague is healed, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other plagues accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition which happens in the belly is either great, or little, or moderate.
And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and if you see that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take of the intrusion of them to their place soon, because it opens and is thickened for that the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best dissection is the middle one, because in that one the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two previously mentioned.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper are used in the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia through that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then it is done in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the dissection as we have said, or when the hernia has come inflammation because of the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then when you cleanse that, you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in tepid water, or which you have squeezed in water with squill, and cypress, and spikenard, and apply that to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes do this with the one which has astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which are steeped alder and mallows, because by this it is relieved the entrails of it with little cause.
But if the entrails of it are excused by this cure, then you widen the dissection a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and that it is not occupied to dry by necessity and lack.
Of the instrument, this is the form of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the extremity is subtle, and not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and the hernia is pushed out, then when its reduction is according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible above that, because it is better.
But when the dissection is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then when you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly if the dissection is in one of the two parts of the belly, then when you place your attention and your consideration always in that so that the part in which the wound is is higher than the other.
And thus when you administer this in the great wounds and in the middle wounds.
And in the small wounds, place what is prepared to you, and when it is ministered, be between your fingers, the one which has the dissection all with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which sews any cause from another.
And this is the way of common suture: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then lets it from the extremity of the dissection of the said ring finger, and strengthens the needle one, or other that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with the two extremities of the forceps that are left the cord of the parts of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the forceps, and are made four orders.
And then strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then let the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety, because the subtle needles lightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter in the cord, and therefore for that reason they must be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not let the needle be stuck in the two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the wound be healed before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged sutures so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient's sleep; and place over the suture puffs expanded of all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and let those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these kinds of suture with needles in this manner is most convenient in the small wounds, because it suffices in the suture of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the forceps, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part where it began, so that the thread retracts from the upper part to the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture saves men.
And with this suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been plagued with a sword, and the disruption of the wound was greater than a palm, and it was swollen around two palms of the belly of the middle part, and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore, I reduced it after that the belly had been pierced by the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured it and it is healed; and after that, it was visible for many months, and it was converted into its dispositions.
And the other physicians had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle, it was healed, for I did not cure it with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but I placed over the wound a clean cloth twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until it was healed.
But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Scripture.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the chain, and introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates into the chain and into that same laceration according to rectum and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the chain in which you have introduced the needle; and make penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the member.
And then, as you have made that penetrate, then you make that penetrate another time in that same extremity of the member from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the chain which is in this place, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make penetrate with that one your penetration with which you make that penetrate in the chain in the extremity of the member which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And then, as you begin from this same side and sew it with the extremity that is of the chain in the other place, and extract the needle from the chain which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that chain and sew the extremity of the chain that is in the other side with this extremity of the member; and extract that one from the chain which is of part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time after another until you sew all that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellies with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the chain one time from the part of the extremity of the chain, and that you leave that other time within while you make it completed.
But the second kind of proper suture which I say is called Gualia, and this is of being of it and for it recommended, is that you sew it according to similarity with which some medicants sew it, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the member to the other extremity of it, and that is done according to that which you to you recommend.
Cover that you fix the needle in the extremity of the member to your proper one from the outside part, and make that penetrate to the inside part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the chain; and then, revolve the needle and make that penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the chain.
And then, revolve those each one, and make penetrate each one from the inside part into the outside part in two extremities of the member others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is suture of which I preceded recollection.
This is the sermon of Gualia.
And more, they said to me, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these one thread each, and begin with introduction of needle of that which you owe, and make that penetrate into the other place according to suture of those with which they sew the hides similarly.
And know that when disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of the medicament of wound is judgment of the other wounds.
Which cause is that when you cleanse the wound recent with its blood before the air alters that one, and reduce the belly and sew that one and fit that one decently, then pause upon that carnation powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause upon that some ointments which are to your presence until they make hard and tighten the threads, and be consolidated chain and member; and then cure that as is the cure of the other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then place a poultice on that spot immediately, because it begins to throw out pus, old blood, and changes twice a day, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many situations when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the main limbs, then you must immerse linen cloth in good quality olive oil, or rose oil, and place it on the area between the angles and leave the bandages.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, because many times this happens, then cauterize that area with a black stiptic, especially if the ulcer is reached in the bowel and is made an opening penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the thick bowel is of lighter healing than the one that is in the subtle bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the bowel which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague that falls upon it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of those that are in them, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the hernia, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your recipe with which you reduce the bowels equally.
But if it has passed into that space and is already made green or black, then you must strengthen that with a file on the spot that is discolored from it, so that blood flows, because in the hernia are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file pendant from the parting left of the plague wound, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must the casement of the hernia and emission of the pus of the plague.
Rememberance of the plagues when they happen in the bowel.
When disruption happens in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, because for this I saw that one who was afflicted in his belly with a lance blow and it was the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he of it had discharge and flatulence.
Therefore I followed the cure of him because he was not confident in the healing of him, but I continued to subtlety him until the wound was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should not happen any accident in his belly; and he did not happen any because of that accident and returned to his usual ways of eating and drinking, and then went into baths and was exercised in his limbs.
And already some experienced ones have said that when a plague happens in the bowel, and it is small, then it must be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take maggots of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a maggot of those that has the mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes hold of those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another maggot near the first, and do not cease to do this with maggots one near another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce that and close the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the bowel be tied with a subtle file which is made of the bowel of beast annexed to it, because it is mes in needle; and it is that you take the extremity of those files of bowel, and it be well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a file of ligature, enveloped, and then introduce that file in needles and close with it the bowel, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this manner of suturing with maggots is nothing but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, because then it is not born but subtlety, and it is not healed of it at all.
Of the cure of zuchem and fistula.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes ancient, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and throws out pus all the time and is not cut off, then, in any member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we call that azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a tough, white, unpainful knot, and the cavity of which is like the cavity of a bird's bone; and for this reason some call that one rizatz, that is, bone.
And it is in some men moist, which throws out pus; and very soon the moisture is cut off in some hours. And some times this moisture is much, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And so that I may make you know the cure of the fistula which is made by way of operation with a knife.
And know that fistulas happen in all the parts of the body; for some of them are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the skull, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the vertebrae of the spine, or to any of the joints composed by composition in such a way that from the hand and the foot; and of these, those that give rise to their proximity to the principal member and their resemblance.
And therefore of these fistulas that are according to this manner, those are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with this is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach those places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula goes straight, and inquire about it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, for lead with the lightness of its body is relieved and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrific things, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice with its orifices, for the moisture with which you cleanse it must go through the other orifices and run from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here has bone or nerve, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or proximate, or whether it is a fistula that has many orifices and is on top of all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you must compress with your hand over the area, and resemblances of the significations and causes accidents to the abscess.
And since you have stood upon all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent proximate or in a salty place, distant from the joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places that I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said before of its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the boil and of resemblances, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is straight, then you must cut that into the preon as much as you are able, and then modify it of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the concavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with it several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is due to you to certify this, then you inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you root that out until the corruption is hosted entirely; and then cure that with what flesh it has until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and throws back as it did, then know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover it again and exquisitely make the root and purification of it with the last strength of your hand, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, well is it; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that you can only do is to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to throw it out, then you throw it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for it.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all of them, and of those leave none behind with your strength.
But if any cause of the humors makes it difficult for you, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the wound what you can place over the wound, and leave it until that is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that it is not consolidated, and that the section which you have incised in your operation is constricted.
However, if you fear, pause over it a cloth submerged in its own tripe with oil, or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when they will have softened those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those attractions is eased.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then remove that with a scalpel only as far as the blackness and corruption remain, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and cut into the area where the corruption has reached, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you should have a man in his thigh so that you can place that as an example and assistant on your operation.
Take a young man around thirty years old, who has an accident in his thigh, and from the parts of his body, the bad matter is on the matter of the body until the matter has reached the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not caused by an external cause.
And therefore take the time with that for the error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and there occur from it many materials, and its cure is stopped until the thigh is fistulated, and there are made in it many horrific wounds which all throw out pus and the humidity of the body.
And therefore the cure took many months of doctors for two years, and I was not in those wise men but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that were running from those horrific wounds for a great body; and already the body of that man was completely swollen and the color of it was yellowish.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
And then I and carefully scrutinized all the wounds and found them to reach to all parts of the thigh.
And then I took my knife and cut into one of the wounds where I described a portion of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a portion of the thigh had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed what to me was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered on the bone secondarily to the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sewed what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered on it another time and did not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I cut into it about an inch of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and the section of him except for the disposition of the fragility of him and for the paucity of his tolerance and fear of death, because he was afflicted in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore he healed is by entire healing, and nothing is in the place of the bone flesh hard; and it was made good the disposition of him in his body and returned the virtue of him; and he was converted in his dispositions and did not make to him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already broken, then when you cut that according to this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command someone to extend that one above; and you pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then you tie that on the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to saw so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a piece of wood or a table below the bone decently, because when you do this it is not prohibited the saw that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cover that it be the sawing over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, and it is one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then place a piece of wood below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but engine.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, since you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to whatever disposition which is possible to you, and in each case make it rectified to you, when it does not do to you contrary vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the instruments to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that every time that you prepare for all species of operation instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the species of the instrument of which you indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and conoyssensa of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, for the hours already you had by you yourself that which is convenient to them of the instruments to all malady.
And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments the ones which you will place cum eyssimples with the ones which you will proceed to your prohibition the one which you will experiment on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient otherwise than with that they are confricadatz the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is the wide open mouth.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another decent saw: it should be made with an arch as high as possible and the sharpness of it from iron, and the member of it from a boy's dagger decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another minor incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient for the ratio of that one which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of an acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and the serration of the bones.
The extremities may be cut either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike by any cause, then when you cut that member into that which the honor encompasses the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice that is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of him to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or it may be brought near the blackness before the poultice is applied to that member which it seizes and which nourishes the whole body; and therefore, you should cut it.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is the percussion of some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or from a viper or from a rubefacient and similar.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you cut it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may nourish in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if instead of that, the corruption passes and sometimes it encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administering another cause another to that cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption encircles the toe of the foot, then you cut it into one of the joints.
And if it takes hold in the instep of the foot, then you cut off the whole foot. But if it enters into the thigh, then you cut the thigh into the joint of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no way but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of cutting the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part farthest from which you want to cut, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, a little bit, so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then cut or saw.
And so that it may be placed cloth of it from all parts so that it does not touch the place itself, and that it comes to the patient's lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if there happens to be a flow of blood when working, then you cauterize the place carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication before it is complete.
And then bind the affected limb with a bandage as convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is when it happens to him blackness in his foot with a burn that was assembled to the burning of fire.
And that corruption happens first in his toe before it spreads to the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself to put pus that he sees the cure go to the member with the violence of it that it atrophies from pain and burning of it, and the inscidic that foot goes into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time happens to him that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And then it comes to me, and so I am perforated to repercuss that superfluity with what I put on the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of him; and it does not repercuss the superfluity and it begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he begs me to incise his hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping on the repercussion of that superfluity, and more that I fear the incision of his hand would be death, for the virtue of the malady was over coming.
And because he despaired of me, he returned to his land and I came to know that the man prepared and incised his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it may be an aid on what catches of this malady, and that its significance for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of the intestines and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When abscesses happen in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is ejected from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is as delicate cloth, and it has not reached posterior corruption, and it has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerve or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as it is revolved, and mostly when it is delicate and is made like cloth, and comfizas that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved posterior consequence, and in the skin there has passed through from the front, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of fetid odor, then you clysterize that with Egyptian medicine, which is of oil and strong wine and zinc receiving equal parts, and they are put in a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with care; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with ash water, when the medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of wheat, and put water over it; and then you collect that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then clysterize with water and honey and that it be mixed with crushed zinc, and clysterize with wine and honey mixed, for by the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of dyphtheritic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties of which I have already written in the treatise of the ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave of it the quantity in which between the clyster its addition.
And if the patient's orifice from which the arm comes out is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the arm runs inside, because when the arm is shortened in the pre-ponderance of the sinew, the flesh is engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew inside the environment of the lowest bone according to your will, then pierce it so that you prepare the limb with a preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is at your apparel and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinew, which you remove every hour so that that which is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if that which runs from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown over the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or appropriates adhesion, then the most you untie it or the third day, and when you untie the plaister, then change the cloth for another and renew the wash.
But if from the sinew a little space appears a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it approaches, because some men in whom a late generation of flesh in the wounds, and of those it is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinew after many days a digested arm is emitted, then know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphynicon wash, when there is in it adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last of all which is cured, is that you take of diaphynicon wash and be dissolved in rose oil, and be on it poured a little honey in its substance, and then mix it with it, and use of it.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphynicon wash, honey when it is cooked inside that it be thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind all and pulverize it over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it with water over cloth and strengthen it over the sinew; and line it with the honey which you have cooked inside that it be thickened, and pulverize it over cloth and strengthen it.
And some times are administered with it the long and peeled roots of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of earth and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and pulverize over the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panariti and  ingrown toenails and  finger incision and section.
Panariti is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the finger or toe, and often arises in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or is an abscess of an abscess caut, or is corrupted, and throws out pus while it corrodes the roots of the nail, and often corrupts all of it, and often spreads its corruption to the bone until it is a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made numb, and the color of it is made dark.
And therefore when you have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not mix your cure, then know that you should cut with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, because cauterization is very useful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the sides of the finger, and they begin to prick it and let it out, then know that you should place a fine ray under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and drive it up and cut it with ease, and place on what remains of the flesh of the medicines comburent and corrosive until it be all removed; and then cure it with washes until it be healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then know that you should cut the bone and extract it, for no time is it healed that there is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the said wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how the remembrance of it is pressed, and then take care of it while it is healing.
If the nail is struck or rubbed, and pain is felt in that area, then as you begin to treat the patient, dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh that remains under the nail, for you will cause the patient intense pain, and it will lead to the birth of superfluous flesh in the area; and then treat the area with water that soothes the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very hard, and it is very hard in the bones, or very hard in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some of the said nuts. But that one that is born in some of the nuts of the finger does not harm, and this one that is born in the joints is very harmful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you cut that one, following its root with a broad spatula.
But of that one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful of the abscess of it.
But in that one that is born in the finger, when you cut it at the beginning, the flesh of it with a round incision inside the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws convenient to water, and then take care of it while it is healing.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers, either between their many movements or by birth of the man who is born so, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then you must remove that consolidation while the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between their cloths of the infused in olive oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a lamina of thin lead while it is consolidated according to what you command.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins that are thick and full of melancholic superfluity, which come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the major arrival of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, you must administer purgation of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it is incised and that the black blood is thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: embroca at the beginning the leg with lukewarm water so that the thick blood is resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the groin into the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in a place, or in two, or in three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg into above, and from below upwards, until the quantity of blood that you want and that you see is enough, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then cover it, and command him to abstain from the foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements, and then put it in a bath and embroca the leg of it with lukewarm water until it reddens and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present to you, until the limb be scalded.
And then cut the vein in the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it of the knee, or in the lowest part of it of the ankle.
And then open the vein with pincers and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the feeling, and it is of the appearance of it that sometimes that rug is declining to blackness.
And therefore, when you evacuate and from the vein you see that white which is cord.
And then you put below it the ray until it is elevated and is thrown from the vein, and suspend it with an onion or a lion.
And then cut another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then scrape the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut that in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is extracted through the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, until all is extracted; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double thread and tie it there and extract it, or introduce it behind it the ray and roll your hand to all parts within which it is thrown. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient for that harm.
And when that whole thing is thrown out, then place over the place of the plague wool soaked in wine and oil rubbed and oil unrubbed, and cure that within which it is healed.
And if the gut is contracted having crookedness in which it is wrapped in the parts, and it is not according to straightness according to what we have said, then cover what you do on that to all parts of its crookedness and to the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks until you elevate that whole thing.
And guard yourself that your section does not cut the vein and that you do not plague that, for it is difficult for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incident with the which is dried gut:
It is not to it acute as with the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity for so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having is in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there is no grass nor aybre.
And it is strongly born in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bowels as if venom from within the body serpents and worms and scarides and worms engendered between the bowels and the flesh.
And sign of the reception of the advent of it is of this vein that accidies in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then it begins the vein to issue from the place of that vesication which seems razit of plant.
And therefore, when it appears from him the extremity, then you should wrap around that a piece of lead of which is the weight of a drachma. Within two drachmas, and no more, and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as yeys of it any cause to the parts outside, cover that in lead and bind that. And if the part is prolonged, then you introduce a partition of it and envelop the remaining; and do not cut that of razit within which it is issued, for if you cut that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes accidies abscess and poyredura in the place and ulceration bad.
For that what should be treated gradually and be extracted little by little, until it is thrown out from the rear of it and no remnant of it remains in the body.
And of this vein is issued in some men that is in its length of v palms and of ten and already it has come to me that it issued one of xx palms.
And if it is cut in the hour of its medication, then introduce the ray in the tract of it and perforate that with long tract with the body, until it is evacuated all that is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that for the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from each orifice a ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is below said.
Of section above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine pain.
This ailment is named in some lands because of its resemblance to the ailment of oxen, for it often affects oxen, and is a worm, few in number, the one which is born between the bowels and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its advancement from limb to limb until it disrupts the bowels and issues forth.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if accidies worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has come to the brain, then very strongly it breaks in it and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by the feeling of its ambulation and appearance of it, and then cover what you do that which is above it and that which is below it with a band and constriction strong, and then cut above it and extract that.
And if it is preondat in the flesh and not the atrobes, then you place cautery with fire on the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being arrived at the head near the temple, then tighten over the eyebrow with a strong constriction, and then squeeze over it, and extract it; and that the patient uses modification of their body with medicines evacuating bad, rotten humors, and guard themselves from foods that generate putrefaction.
On the section for the ailment of nafir.
This ailment is named in our land nafir, and it is the pain which comes in certain limbs, and then is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and uncovered her arm and saw a small inflation in the vein of the arm, and because it was warm for an hour, I saw that inflation go as if a worm was pushing it to this, but more lightly than it should be, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it went to the pain of that place and it felt in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to her that she should roll herself over her whole body as I saw; and it was too marvelous of the permutation of it and the velocity from limb to limb. And I had already seen that before in my own limbs in that manner, however, I have seen many who suffer pain being changed from limb to limb. But I did not see that in the limbs as in the woman.
And I did not think that it was anything but that because the woman was old, or of dry body and uncovered veins, and in this appearance, that windiness was perceived.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with moist bodies of well-covered veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent at the temple as we have said, then you tighten over it and leave it lightly and squeeze over it until that windiness is contracted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your own temples, then you cure it with shaking of the body and with what you expel windiness, and charms those with fetid pills and pills of serapi and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the head is when it strikes there an arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it is issued from the cyphasis which is above the brain, for it accedes through it soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the limbs, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very much the word is absconded and the voice is destroyed, and it is issued from the place of the wound a white humidity resembling dust, and eyes of it resembling the liquidity of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and felt with that which it is fixed in hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very much the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and running of the wound black blood, and it feels that cold of the extremities, and sweat cold, and syncope; and therefore know that death descends all through.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are so much blood spume from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are apoplectic, and the color of the patient is changed, and expiries great spirit, and demands traction of cold air.
And if it strikes the arrow in the ligament which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small of the back, and it is made the ale great with vehement pain and with sigh, and it is not bad all the limbs of the muscles.
And if it strikes the arrow in the stomach, then very much eyes of the wound food any undigested.
And if it strikes the arrow in the belly, and it is fixed in it, eyes some wound of the wound, or the cloth, or the intestine which is dislocated, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine is expelled outside, and something is processed from it to the outside parts, and there is a lot of pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
May the other members, as is the face, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders and arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their likenesses of the limbs, be saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount this to you that I have seen of the being of these arrows, so that you signify by this about your cure.
The cause is, because in a man a shaft pierced the lacrimal of his eye at the root of his nose, and you extracted that from the other part, leaving the gray of the auricle of his eye, and he is healed, and it did not harm the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no auriculas.
And the Jew healed, and it did not harm his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was lodged in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one that has auriculas; and therefore I incised upon it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I subtly worked with it, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, since forty days had passed and nothing had changed about him from his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and worked with it, and he healed, and it did not harm him at all.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow pierced his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since it had been four years, he pulled the arrow out at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow pierced her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and it had not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow pierced his face and the wound was consolidated, and he removed the arrow, not finding much pain, and many likenesses to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the prince of the king who was shot in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his cure about three days after the shooting of the arrow.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow very carefully; and then I inquired about it with a subtle touch, and I did not feel it; but I felt a prick below the right auricle, and therefore I suspected that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster which has attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place was to be plastered so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow, so that it would dry over it.
And it did not harm the place significantly that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and it did not harm at all; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he removed the pain of the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed on the wound medicine acute corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the touch I felt it, and examined the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted it in the appearance of the wound by that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and it passed to me time with that for the space of time within four months.
And then, because the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and remove it, I did not cease to subtly work and engineer on it with ingenious ways, until one day I began to hang it with forceps skillfully made, according to how they will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient healed completely, and he did not suffer in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you pause this rule and signification about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended by the narration nor do those comprehend it in the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument because of the descent of the extraneous causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not pulled out of the members in which they are stuck except in two ways: either by traction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that one which is pulled out by the place where it entered, either the arrow proceeds in fleshy place, and it is pulled and pulled out.
And if it does not obey the easement of the hour in which it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it can be softened, and the traction of it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you in the easement, then leave that one for some days and repeat that with traction and movement every day, and it will be pulled out.
And if it does not obey your easement after some days, then you must drill into the shaft of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the hole is widened from the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire that one with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments which are convenient for the traction of it.
And if you cannot over it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the shaft, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut into the plague until it is widened and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears in which it is held, then you cut the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the skill that you can do; and engineer over that, if you cannot over the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with the twist of your hand with forceps in all parts until it makes that obey; and subtily with the subtlest skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made for you difficult to extract it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot over it in your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the shaft of it soften, and then repeat it because then it is alleviated. But if to you makes contrary flow of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And therefore that you do to oppose the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you must the placement of the arrow in it, for it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible for the figures.
But the arrows that are pulled out by the opposite of the other part, or that already from it proceed some part to the parts of outside, or make difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut over that; and be the section according to the quantity in which the forceps grip; and then pull it out, because it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the blade according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then repeat it until it can be.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is envenomed, then you must excavate all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is close so that you touch it with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut over that, then cut over it and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indigested, and cure that until it is healed.
Shape of forceps with which arrows are fired:
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak that are made like a saw when they take hold of the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these, many kinds are made, large, few, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
As if a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two bones that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and— these are the veins that are called algelic—; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; because of those is one cephalica, and it is the wild vein; and the people call it “the vein of the head,” and deaf, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalica; and that name the people “vein of the whole body,” and basilica is the vein that is placed in the domestic vein, and it is called “citillar,” and the vulgar call that “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it is placed over the focil, and it is that in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that which appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild vein; and the second is sophena, and the place of it is below the leg of the domestic vein; and the sciatica vein, and the place of it is below the leg of the wild vein; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The benefit of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and sahafati and bad old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be scraped the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the places of them are near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and ask that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the attempt.
Then you take the sharp lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein into the bone until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the upper parts and make an incision in the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it bleed as much blood as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has been preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient emigration and bad and obstinate ophthalmia and acute effusions of superfluity to the bones.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck well until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and the pulse of them is demonstrated below your finger; and then you will feel the attempt.
And then you elevate the bone above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicated, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and make an incision in it as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a poultice over that and tighten it above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already has been preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the phlebotomy of the cephalica to the old ailments of the face and to emigration and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to what I have recommended to you; so is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, of which this is the form:
Pause the point which is at the head of the fossor over that vein and strike upon it with a penche or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and tighten that until it is healed.
And some times it is opened with phlebotomy, however no that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as well as the others, rather be of blunt extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong, it would break it with the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the usefulness of the two veins that are in the lacrimals of the two heels for scabies of the heel by itch and seborrhea in the heels, and in the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you being standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse along a little with phlebotomy a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, very likely the extremity of it is broken.
And then make the blood run as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuts, and tighten those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and for vehement thirst, and for the diseases of the face and migraine and itch that happens in the face, and mostly when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtle long and place it in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood run according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the two guides guides to constriction of the ale and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens each one in his neck with a bandage; and be the artificers over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
And then phlebotomize the vein along with a phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract blood according to temperature quantity or according to what you times of necessity that is ad to; and then make semblance of the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and tighten the two veins with a medium constriction so that the patient is not provoked, and leave until in the morning because the plague is healed.
And the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the veins algerich, convenes to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient face you, and tighten the neck of him with a bandage, and then you revolve the lips of him and look at the two veins of which the one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this more is because in the circuit of those so veins small black; and therefore, you inscise each one by incision inscident.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand the incision of the major of those, and of the pus manifested of those.
And make the semblance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the usefulness is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to preoccupations that are in the gullet, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and look below the tongue, of the one side of him vein and of the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those so arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those that corr custom in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive to subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and call it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the patient lie so as sometimes, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of blood appearing thick, and those that contain thick, clotted blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to make phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle, citrus blood.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extrates the blood from the diseases that are left the throat and the neck, and from that which affects the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that vein, that he guard well and be over-fearful in that, for below it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will wound that artery and blood will flow, so that he who does that phlebotomy with a phlebotomy point, should lift it with an incision as it is necessary.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you phlebotomize in the place of its end of the arm, for that one is manifest; and cut that one with a phlebotomy incision as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the metacarpal vein, then it is necessary before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place within which you know the place of the wrists, and then place your hand on it with a tension; and then lie the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with a phlebotomy incision as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you stretch the ligament, inflammation in the place that you have marked with tension, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as it were the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you should stop and place your hand over it for a long space; and then oppose your hand, and if the blood is separated, for several times it is separated, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the motion of him, and be over-fearful of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not separated, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then you should wound the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is separated; or that you take a piece of fig, and fen that, and take the one majority and stretch that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending to the ligament and to the pulvils within the other day.
And then if the blood is separated, it is well; and if not, then cure that with water of which it is preceded to the recollection of the place of the pulvils separating the flow of blood.
And the separation of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the fusca vein the phlebotomy is a benefit that extrates the blood from the superior part of the head and from the part below the body; for that is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist that one be over-fearful in the phlebotomy of it, for below that there is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will cause to him stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and very few are healed of all, and this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and is not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with a incision of the point, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in the length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the diseases of the heels.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want that the phlebotomy be done with a phlebotomy olive or with a phlebotomy myrtle; for it is the most safe of all the veins, for it is not below it the artery nor the nerve.
But however, very few are abscesses in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not touch in that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only in the preservation of health and in the hope and precaution of the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy is performed in one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and that phlebotomy is performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of repletion.
And it should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that has passed three hours of the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And that a child should not be phlebotomized before he has fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month into the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And since someone wants to be phlebotomized by any manner, it is necessary to cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, if in those there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not throw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
And they should not be phlebotomized the patients nauseous, acutely sick, or suffering from indigestion, nor evascent from illness or drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor from dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, near vomiting, near a swollen belly, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and from every cause that dissolves the virtue, either corporal or animal.
And before that, consider in the subtilization of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible to it.
And before that, enter in a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by any exercise so that the blood is subtiliated.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforsa te that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as is labor and superfluous pain and coitus and semblance to them.
And to his bed, let him make present the causes in the use of the one which custom of men with aromaticity and odor and with bals and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist over a cushion that is softer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And before that, extract his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and before that, strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap that two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for the stricture when it is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or is with softening, and then prohibit the body of blood ascent.
And before that, the stricture, it is necessary that the one who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together meanwhile while the veins are inflated, and are declared to the feeling.
And before that, the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy with a little bit of olive oil properly; and before that, place his left hand index on that vein, beside the place of which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is seated because of the veins is the one that atrophies as the heart flees, and of those is that it is full of wind and when you place the phlebotomy on that it is contracted, and it is discovered the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is straitened.
And therefore, for this, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And before that, after the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one time, then well is it; and otherwise, you iterate that other time beside that place a little, or on it with a festin, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the place is inflamed, or the patient is scared, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, for strong it will draw the abscess caut, nor enter into a bath.
And before that, iterate the phlebotomy if the need.
And if the opening is small and flows blood subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the opening a little, and do that with festin before that the place is inflamed, because the place is inflamed in many men because of a little opening.
But if sometimes that one is already inflamed, then you do not iterate on it, because it excuses you no cause; and pause on that some part of the wound of oil, because it alleviates the body of blood. And it is better in this location than oil and the other oils.
And similarly administer a fenestration of oil in every phlebotomy with which phlebotomies the veins of the prohibition of the body of blood, and they do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed from one of those on the area, because the blood is subtle and is revolted when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a great abscess is generated, because many times it happens, and mostly to those who have not been bled but only that time, or in the opening of the vein little, and then you cover it, and place on the area a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that it does this near the  flow of blood from that vein with the complement of it or of another vein.
And if in the location for some days some blackness or greenness remains, do not notice this; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calament or similar to it.
And many times abscesses and eminences happen after phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness under your compression, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore guard yourself that you place on it any cause of what has been said, because it is likely to flow from the artery blood.
And make a plaster with water in which it is styptic, so that the location may endure, and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color visible on the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is ropy; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtle; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in one who is frail, let the contrary of that be done, and cover that you extract it in troops of times, and that the trauc be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from it a little of the blood in three or four times.
And if it is a cold constitution, then prepare before phlebotomy a pa infused in essence of myrrh or in essence of honey aromatized with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in essence aromatized and with a good odor.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of much blood, then cover that you prepare to drink water of meat and essence much odorant subtle; and use of aromaticity with algualea, and be the patient's feet with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood in small doses, cover that to him of whom the phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
May who wants to evacuate his arm, and take out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this near seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
May who wants to throw the blood of his body to the contrary of the part to which it declines, cover that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
May that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be taken out of it blood in one time and that a great quantity be thrown out of it and that the opening be amplified until syncope occurs, because you will have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand on the wrist of him of the blood, so that he does not die in the place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not cover that when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the emission of the blood, that you press above it with vehemence and curved it be extended slightly, because this is too bad.
Have the patient let it flow until it is phlebotomized secondarily; or remove this with the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress this with light compression until the blood is outside.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood, and there is no excuse, then you should bleed him in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "brachial vein" is flebbotomated in the place of the fusca or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until the focus reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then tie it tightly around that limb with a stricture bandage; and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse little, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And be the opening wide and be your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize on the wrist a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the less is placed the body of the blood in cold water in times of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it leaves him without a pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right arm is conferent to the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that you tie the hand with a bandage or with your own hand, because you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the viewer; and then perform the phlebotomy transversally; and if you incised it completely, do not touch it in return.
And keep that you do not touch your hand with the phlebotomy, because from him are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in it, because if you do not repeat it in the cold water, the blood is coagulated in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And as soon as the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be coagulated tightly; and similarly, you should do in all straight vein.
But the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the left arm is that it is conferent to the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other.
And the usefulness of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is to the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and limbs old, and to their likeness of diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes friction over it until the veins appear well; and tie over the ankle of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein the talo appears, and from that it is ramified in the surface of the foot, motz ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest ram or below the ankle, below the talo of the addition of him, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that in the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize for the traverse, as if you wanted to incise it.
And be the phlebotomy voil.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you repeat the foot of him in the cold water and let the blood run in it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy in a little bit, because the place is safe; and do not fear of him malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the talo of the  left side of the cavity.
And the usefulness of the phlebotomy of it is to pain of the hip when it is by blood caused.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient enters into a bath, and fesitine and strengthens the thigh of him from the side of the wide below the talo below four fingers in a long subtle bandage, because it appears only by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize it according to each skill that is to you possible and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise it by incision or secces it by section, because the place of it is safe.
And she is in most men most loved; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot opposite the auricular and annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make the blood flow in the amount you want.
Then loosen the stricture and place it on the location of the phlebotomy incision and strengthen the area, as it is slightly healed.
Of suction and the qualities of using them.
Suctions are of horns, or of glass, or of wood.
And suction is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without scarification.
And this suction that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the suctions that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which suctions are placed is the occiput, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and suctions of the chin below the jawbone; and suctions of the two scapulae; and suctions of the hypochondrium, and it is above the end of the rib; and suctions of the two flanks, and they are of two sides; and suctions of the two armpits; and suctions of the two groins.
And suction does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture the virtue through those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it advisable that suction be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes suction for illness or for continuity, we administer it at all times at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time that is.
And therefore when you see in any of those causes, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that suction be done more than it has passed from two or three hours of the day.
And the benefit of suction of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and to that which is effused to the eyes; but it is advisable that that be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this suction is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that which is of phlegmatic complexion, or in which is catarrh, because it gives to that great harm.
And for that reason it is not advisable to use it in the old people, and in the heads of whom are phlegmatic illnesses.
But to him who upon that is continuing upon it is done oblivion; and for that reason it is advisable that you command the suction-maker to place his hand a little with the suction at the parts behind, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But suction of the ankle is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and basilica: and for that reason it confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is advisable that the suction of the ankle be pulled a little, because if it is placed behind, it engenders weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suction of the alhagdahan confers to the pains accidental in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and prefoci, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is advisable that you command the suction-maker that he not press his hand with scarification so that he does not pierce the artery and that a flux of blood does not occur.
And suction below the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and appearances to them of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the suction that is done upon the two scapulae confers to caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the suction of the two parts behind the flanks confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, that is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins slender of the other veins more gross until that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the suction-maker that he does not too much proceed in scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and behind it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a suction with which it is suctioned upon the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers more behind.
And command the bellows to be large and of fire, because the place needs a strong incision; and very fine bellows are used and it is to be scarified with a sharp incision.
But bellows applied to the legs are less effective because they draw blood from the whole body, and they resemble old pains in the chest, stomach, and bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and resemble both labor and childbirth; and they are in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and they are used for the removal of two cavities.
But they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And of the bellows, the use is proper to the bellows of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the bellows is that you place the bellows at the beginning and draw it out with a moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the bellows, but pause them lightly, and move them gently, and that the humors come to the place by gentle arrival. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated and that the color of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and repeat the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh, you must scarify him once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the bellows to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you must scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtlety to the blood and its fluidity is opened. But in the second, to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then the third scarification should be made so that the last is achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood was thick, then we must scarify with a pre-existing scarification.
And the term of scarification in which the depth of the incision is only.
And if that one whose flesh is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the bellows should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of double almonds, or oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of saint, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, sticky, then the oil should be marigold, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
But if the bellows are of wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should be washed with waters or with cold water of salvia, or with quince water, or with water of rosemary, and similar to those.
And one whose blood is of much humidity, washes their bellows with sour wine, or with myrtle and sumac water and similar to those.
And one whose superfluities are thick, washes their bellows with old wine, or with water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or of chamomile, and similar to those.
And the bellows should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered about an hour or two after, and they should sleep near the bellows.
What is necessary to be regulated before bloodletting?
You must consider at the beginning: if the bellows or the one who is to be bled is choleric and has sharp blood and inflammation, then cold causes should be preferred, such as vinegar, endive, sour wine, lettuce, and licorice, and syrup, and similar.
And pause their meals as much as possible, and meats of well-cooked birds, and foods seasoned with sourness, and similar.
And of one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary to encourage the drinking of syrup of licorice, or syrup of althea, and sumac, and wine very fragrant between veal and lamb; and that he be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and to pause from foods of little and canary, and sparrows and small birds and pigeons.
And that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that some men be given to drink in some hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, a mixture of tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, that is nutmeg, or alcelita, so that the main limbs be comforted and the blood be made subtle; and that they should not take those scalfs.
But the bellows that are scarified should be placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and on the side of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought by those (doctors) but the traction of blood from the limb, just as they place a cupping glass on the nipple in the disease of blood flow from the nose; and they use it so that the cold, viscous air from the limb is dissolved, just as they place it on the belly and the navel; for that thins the limb and softens it and removes the pain as it resolves the air.
And it is placed over the boils when they occur in their opening or pus, for by virtue of the strong traction, the pus is drawn out and the boil is eradicated from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is placed over the liver and spleen, drawing out the air enclosed in those.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with suction alone; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
And this is because the cupping glass is to be filled and be larger, so it is water poured alone or water in which herbs have been boiled suitable for the purpose.
The form of a cupping glass administered with fire: its orifice width is two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the resin is the majority of a palm; and it is in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the prick is small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It is made of a thin, smooth, citron, with large margins, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the limb of its position upon it.
And in the middle of it a transverse bar of iron or steel, upon which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recounted; and the few less according to the diseases and the state of that one who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the infants and the emaciated are others than the cupping glasses of the young and of robust bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is ignited around the departed place so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed over the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the prick that we have said, until when we have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that we show the finger and that the vapor escapes over that prick, then the cupping glass is dissolved instantly.
And prop (i.e., according to) the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated by that.
But in a cupping glass that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor prick, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed over the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping glass as much as it is larger, so much the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in most members but in the members in which it is not possible to position cupping glasses, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in members naked of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of the two ponds of purity.
And then they are laid the day and the night in pure water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with cupping glasses; and then the limb of the patient is rubbed until it reddens; and then they are placed upon it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction from the place with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial.
And if not, then the place is washed with vinegar and then with a lot of water; and it is rubbed and expressed.
And if the body of the blood is prolonged at the time of the leeches, and it is this result, then you put a cloth of it in cold water, and place that on top until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then pulverize over it vitriol tri-sulfate, or galangal and similar to them of the stiptic causes, until the blood is stopped; or cupping glasses are placed on the place, and they are laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And cove, if it is necessary, the iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the place is rubbed with recent blood or a needle is left in the places until blood escapes; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood instantly adhere.
And when you want them to detach, pulverize over them a little of aloes tri-sulfate, or salt, or ashes, and they detach instantly.
Thus begins the discourse of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is most necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
O, son, know that these foolish physicians and the vulgar boast of this chapter and those who never regard the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at all; and I have not adopted this that I have learned, but by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science from them.
And therefore I turn to experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has been passed; because I have abridged it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and abridged it in the end of abridgement; and showed it in the end of declaration; and formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from those whose preface is necessary before we begin the remembrance of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say that in the preface of this chapter, the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artificers are forced and stand on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art others than you.
And therefore I say that when you happen upon a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fracture, then you must at the beginning apply yourself to phlebotomy or to let blood, or both, if no cause prohibits it, as a lack of virtue, or the one to whom you happen to attend is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then let him be content in his food with fresh herbs and bird meats and crabs; and prohibit gross meats and fill him with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cautery abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment, both thick and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick fat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made the coagulation of the fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the bones that are broken in men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and amnesties over the broken bone of every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is at the same time conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's foods, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And you will come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the other.
Many varieties of fracture within themselves. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their own; for there is made arched fracture another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the saga and stars and additions proceeding and not proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And for this it is known fracture of the bone: it is the tortuosity of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent curvature in the place and it is not felt when you touch the bones with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is a curvature or small fissure, in which case you must support that with your hand and with compression of all; however, place on top of it some medicines of which you remember at this moment the ones that are suitable for the place; and then, make it strictly by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is curved and not split in two or another thing that does not happen in it, as it is remaugued all parts of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to the rectification of it, however, it must happen to it after a cautery abscess.
And if it happens to it an abscess cautery, then leave that for some days until the abscess ceases; and then, bandage it according to any manner that you can of lightness and of ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the sharpening of it is lighter than of the bone in which the accident happened.
And then strengthen it according to what will come the memory of it.
But if in the bone there are fractures, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be in the position with which you pause the limb place it according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then you perforate that you make them return with ingenuity and according to any manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation pain or injury; and perforate yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any other cause, rectify that and bandage it for the amount of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as some foolish doctors do who often make abscess cautery happen by their operation, or make contraction in the limb as we have seen happen by the operation of their foolish ways.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; because you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the finger and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelope be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelope wide and hard, because the wide bandage connects the great limb and strengthens it from all parts with equal constriction, so that in it no macula enters.
And then, as you begin, apply your evacuation of constriction, pause ligament convenient to this, over the place of that fracture with three bandages or four according to the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then, look at that to the part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than not to force the constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then, lengthen yourself with the bandage of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then, take another bandage and wrap that other way over the broken place with bandage, and then look at the bandages to the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the bandage and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
And then, pause between the bandages of wool or cloth with which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then, pause over it another bandage, and then bandage over these bandages stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause over it what sits the abscess that and that oste the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And let the stars be of the majority of wide cane reed, and well formed wisely; or let them be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each star be according to this form and this figure:
However, you must the star that is placed over that fracture be thicker and wider a little than the other stars, and the length of the star according to what is measured to the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then lie it below with a faithful decent way according to what we have said of constriction, and that it be your constriction according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as it is elongated from the fracture, the less is the constriction.
And that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fools putting their threads of cords of flax, and it is a great error, when the constriction is not equal.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a constriction with those that you want, and it is not necessary that between the thread and thread there be less than a finger's width.
And if the patient is said to be feeling the tightness of the threads at the extremities of the limbs near the constriction in those places, then place some wool or carded wool between them so that it does not injure him.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in a plate, and an accident happens in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that one in the second chapter singularity.
And know that you should not immediately bind a broken limb with straps on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed on it with straps but rather after about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety from the advent of a boil.
And this is the manner of the splints with which the Ancients restored, which were placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of splinting as commonly used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many conditions and especially for women and children, because it is the one on which no heat nor friction comes; and it is that you take of powdered meal, and it is the medulla of the flour that you must leave the movement of the mill on the sides of the mill.
And mix that as it is, unless that you sift it with album of egg, and place the mixture of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of that.
Another way to plaster a fractured, dislocated, or sprained limb: Take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of each one drachma x; of frankincense and aloes one drachma v; alochil one drachma xx; all are ground and sifted and mixed with almond water or albumen of egg if the patient's complexion is delicate; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores bones that are broken slightly, and confers strength to many men.
Another way to make a plaster that helps with fractures and sprains: Take migrach and powdered white althea one drachma x; of frankincense and aloes one drachma v; of acacia drachma vi; of Armenian bol drachma .xx.
All of them be triturated in mortar with much contricio, and be sifted, and be comfit with water or with album of egg and be administered.
Method of splint to joints and separated bones from those places, and if pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool suet and be submerged in vinegar and cooked oil and be placed over the place.
More in this plaster is not virtue of restoration, of boil caut and expelling pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; conterey all and make a plaster of them.
Method of plaster abbreviated administered deserves the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: recipe of root of althea, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of ers, of all ana part .i.; Be all triturated and be comfit with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then mix that with moist coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster more strong in resolution than this first, when accidents hard boil deserves the restoration of the limb: recipe of root of althea and of seed of li, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all be triturated and be comfit with water of sauze or with sweet water or with wine, all that according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
But Ipocras does not say in his book that it be placed on the broken limb for the restoration of it but rather made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommits that it be medium between thickness and fineness.
But Gualia has seen that be placed on the broken limb for the restoration of it and the causes in which it is exsiccacio with small of heat so as myrrh, incense and resemblances to them of those causes that we have recommitted.
Method of plaster that confers to lesion and pain: recipe of meal, of cheeses, of human hair unshorn or feathers of bird, and of althea, and salt, parts equal; be triturated and sifted and be comfit, and be made plaster.
But the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and then be untied, is that you consider if no pain or numbness or the bone is broken, it is not bad from its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if it happens to the place vehement pain or numbness or inflammation, then you must remove or untie that bandage immediately, and place a plaster on it.
And take a cloth of linen and a sponge of sea lion wet, and submerge that in lukewarm water, and with that wash the place until that numbness and pain are calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place over it wool cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it over it for a night until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that the inflammation of the member rests, and the pain of it is removed.
And then repeat that stricture subtle and small plaster and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the fever and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already healed of all, and you remove the plaster and the constriction, then you repeat that as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if it happens to the member no cause of those that have been said, then you do not untie it but for three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes all that is left for twenty days according to what appears to you from the unbinding of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the constriction more than in your first constriction altogether, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded the remembrance of him.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and thinner than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore embroider that with lukewarm water you must always that you untie it; and that is in all three days; and relieve the constriction a little, and for this operation the nourishment goes to the member, and it is healed lightly.
But what those foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to what it should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, it is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were a straightener that increased the Ancients in their writings and were agreed with that done.
And I have not seen any of theirs do that, because it is more reasonable that it should not be done.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bones within the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the weapon incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the back of it; and this species of fracture is called levitation absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and of fracture that is compression or attrition; and the cause of it is a blow with a hammer or a fall on a rock, and their likenesses.
And this fracture is either penetrating that already approaches the pannicol which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is either great or small.
And of fracture it is that it is ammended in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species is called capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made either by a fall or by a blow of a rock and its likenesses, which makes some lamina of the bone enter into the parts within, and it is made in the concave place as if it happened to the wheels of a chariot when it happens to their blow and it is the parting of their entrance into the parts within.
And mostly it is done this in the bodies of wet bones, as if it were the heads of infants.
And to all these species of fractures, there are pains as if stars separated. And I will come with remembrance of all that in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture by detection over them and by inquiry of them with touches and examination of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And the capillary species is known by that which is discovered over the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined over it with touch, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of a fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification over pain, as if it were vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and fever of those, and likenesses to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, then adopt that it is not healed.
And if you see accidents non-current, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The reason is that if the afflicted person has come to you at the beginning as he is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you should study the state of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the state of the bone before the seventh day, because that which is left of the bone should be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and crushed, then you should insert the small and crushed piece, according to what I will recount to you.
And you must shave the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as you are able according to the figure of the ailment, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess, then you must oppose it with what you have, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and make the patient rest until the abscess is settled, and if you are sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor this, a little wider than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
And you should have various numbers of incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the back of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that it does not hit the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you should perforate in its circuit before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deep drills.
And they are not called thus, but because those do not reach the term of the bone of the test, to that which is near it, because the drill has a round extremity or edge over that which is left the head of it sharp resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a great number of which as many as convenience to the thickness of each bone,  so that it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve that with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause that which is between all the tract the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then insert with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on that in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for that, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And you should guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the ciphrac.
And therefore, as you will have circuited the bone perforating, and if it is continued with it, and you will have extracted that, you should shave and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but however, it should be more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if there remain any parts of the small bones and splinters, then take that with ease with that which you owe you of the instruments; and then take care of the patient with liniments and ointments which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and agile of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is long and do not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the ciphrac with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of a part with a small mallet until you insert the whole bone with ease as it is revolved, and you are sure of the panniculus that no accident happens to it in any manner, and if the medicant14 were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
And now if any cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in some places of bone, insert that of it with the extremity of that lenticular incisor, and deliver that of it with ease, because it is delivered of it its nuisance and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is separated or taken from the bone is its fascia, and it remains in it roughness and subtle satagias, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those satagias with subtle razors, which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible for you to administer in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what you are doing in your operation that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your ratio with the razor which you remove the bone at the beginning the most thick of those razors, and then use the most subtle of it, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most thick and the most subtle of all of them.
But in any of the other fractures, small capillary and subtle fractures, when you administer care according to what you perceive for the rectification of it.
And it is the cause that it is not guarded over all those who have studied in that art. And this is what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is torn when you remove the bone, then when you take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in warm oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and warm oil and place it over the first cloth, and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not injure the skin; and then administer over this bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has alone.
And leave this with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie this and administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, such as roots of linen and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and similar to those.
And that you make of these medicines a powder that is pulverized over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer in this all medicine of property of which is that it abstergesca and not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and that there be no in it dirt of washing or other; nor let virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and you can spoil that, and it happens to the patient according to that evil malice.
And it happens in the skin of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when the cure of it is lessened, and it is black in the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious if it is all adopted.
And if it does not happen blackening but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackening, then when you take of honey one part and of warm oil three parts. And with those lineys a cloth, and then place that over the skin; and then cure this with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those sometimes, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and it does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then when you introduce the said little one into its nose, and that you align that fracture from within with your said finger, and with the said push of outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done this by you with facility, and guard yourself that no pain comes to the patient from that your operation.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach that, then when it is equal with the extremity of the ray in which it is small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And take care of it in the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then the vii or x of days the rest of the abscess caut.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of such quantity that it fills the trough of the nose.
And I say some of the ancient restorers that the splints are enclosed in butter, and are changed every day, but it is not seen to me; it ought to be that the piece is enclosed in album of cooked egg with powder of moly; and then leave the which one until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes it is introduced into the nose, in place of splint, a pain of hawk pus that is enveloped in cloth of lion; and be that already you have the fracture of the nose more vehement and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do splints.
And if another abscess occurs after cautery, apply a poultice of cerot or coto infused in vinegar and rose oil, or diaquilon.
But if no abscess occurs after cautery, then you must apply a poultice to the outside with sesame flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg white; and place a linen cloth over it, and do not touch it with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then you must cut over them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the incision, and treat it with water that heals and consolidates, and with suitable plasters.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then you must treat it with poultices and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a plague, then observe if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not broken in two and is curved at the parts inside, then its knowledge is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you must introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and push with that the inward flexibility of the fracture with ease to the outside parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and with this decency equal them.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then you must administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and place a cerot on the broken mandible, and place a double cloth over it, and place over the cloth a large splint made decently, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the mandible; and tie that bandage according to how you have prepared the ligation of it and how you deem the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food soft and lean.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then you must remove and untie that on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and apply a poultice of powdered moss, egg white, or sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot from it, and place over the poultice a linen cloth.
And therefore, as it stands attached and adjusted that poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs after cautery, then administer what we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you must subtilize that you remove those splinters with what you deem suitable for their removal with instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is strait, then you must enlarge it with the fleubotomist according to the quantity of your need.
And when you will have removed those splinters, and of those nothing is removed, then you must close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the poultices that you deem suitable for it and heal it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated in two parts, the other which do not occur splinters; and it is easy to the restoration of it; or it is so that it occurs splinters in it, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make two ministers be present, so that one holds the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then engulfs the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what you deem, and that there is in it little eminence nor concavity.
And if you deemed more extension, then you must place under the patient's shoulder a support of cloth or wool, and be the size of it according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the clavicle and hold the support with your hand until you engulfs the fracture according to what you deem.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the outside parts, because it is reached to the preon, then you must make the patient be supine on his neck, and place over the muscle of it a cushion of medium size.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the lower parts while the bone of the clavicle is elevated that is in the preon in it, and then you rectify the fracture and engulfs it with your fingers.
But if you feel pangs in the collarbone and it hurts, then place your hand on that area and extract those pangs with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then your ingenuity makes an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this purpose, because you have placed under the collarbone the instrument that serves the head; and it is a tool of wood or iron, of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus as sometimes, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plaque which you have incised when you have extracted the pang from the bone is wide, and it is certain of pus caut, then you adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus caut, then you fill the plaque with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the scissure of the plaque.
And if pus caut occurs, then you put a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
And all, that the board be not harmful over the broken bone; and for so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the board already being remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the ligation.
And then place the sleeping of the patient on the neck of it, and place under the little bit of it of it during the night a small cushion; so that with that it be elevated the helper of it from the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to the neck of that.
And do not untie the ligation if you do not occur in the place precisely or the pus, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it is restored and coagulated the fracture of the collarbone.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of engine which is to you possible.
And then place on the place flour powder with egg white and linen cloth; and then place powder of cloth duplicated; and then place over it a board made of thin board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or maybe a little.
But if under the board is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with linen cloth, and then put the board according to equality.
And then strengthen under it with long humidity with constriction decent and firmness of the board until it be not remauguda from its place.
And consider the ligation every day; and every time that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the board if it is remauguda from its place.
And place the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is complete, then you dissolve the ligation, and that you know for sure that it is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone's weight and put under the shoulder, then you split over it, and take it out, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of the discharge of pus caut if it occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and that is very bad; but the extremities of it must be moved that they are cicatrized and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken it is that it declines to the parts of it and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and cough, and strong fever and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be laid the patient on his back, and place between his shoulder blades a cushion; and then press on the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtly in the operation of it and in the equation according to every manner that is to this possible and that convenes to this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and tow and place above the table a subtle sheet of gauze or of caligi and of their likeness in levitat, because that you envelop that in cloth; and then subtly in lian that over the broken bone that it not be harmful; and go am liadure according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that am stricture decent; and then consider the liadure in every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the desliament of that, you must corrode or pruziment, the pain, the abscess that happens in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which happens by that in manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be sanat.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places thick that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part in front, it does not happen to those contricio but because that they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden to the feeling, therefore the inquiry of it with the said.
And the restoration is such that align the fracture with the said according to the manner possible, until that it be aligned according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if it is indigenous of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then happens to the patient great pain and puncture, as well as puncture that happens to him who has pleureci, and because that the bones put the veil; and happens to it difficulty of hanelit, and cough, and vomit of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients so ingenious in that with motz engientz.
And of them it is said: cove that you put foods of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, because the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
But we would not advise that because that it not be cause leugiera to generate abscess caut, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it already helps to that.
And they said some of them that it be laid upon a ventouse and then that it suck with force; and it is seeming to ratiocinacio, but however it is feared that the ventouse drive the superfluities to the place by the weakness.
And they said some of them: cove that the place be covered with wool that already is submerged in hot oil, and that pulvils be placed between the ribs until that it be filled, that it be the liadure aligned when it envelops that according to roundness; and then be cured the patient with cure of pleurisy of food and of medicine.
And if cause vehement constricts the patient the which does not suffer, and the bones put the veil with puncture ledent, fear over the patient, then cove that they cut over the place, discover of the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they cut the bones with facility, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with sewing, and cure that with plasters until that it be healed.
And if it happens of it abscess, then you cut and put pulvils in hot oil and place over the place, and that it be cured the patient with that which cove to the abscess of it.
And be laid on his back upon the which he sleeps, until that it be healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it happens fracture to the bones of the neck, and it is very bad to their attrition, and seemingly to the vertebrae of the back. And as that happens to some and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, because if sometimes their hands already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot more those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrict those with your said or prick those with needle and no feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the worse of dispositions it is mortal.
And if those and feel in those constriction with the said and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will go with cure.
And if you see in the neck vertebrae the appearance of this and want to know if it is healing or not, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already softened, accidies to those humors that are happening in the hands, and as soon as you put your hand on their back, you feel wind and digestion, and sometimes it is raised on its back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
But if you do not see any cause of those, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure of him is that you perforate the seat of the abscess with a cautery, and you put on the affected vertebra olive oil rubbed with salt, or with mugs of hot water; put on that area several times a day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then put one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it on that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if you see the separation of the bone from the cartilage or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover that with a bandage and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure it with some kind of ointment of the surgeons, until it is healed.
But if the tailbone is broken, and it is the end of the spine, then cover that with a bandage and that you hold that bone with the other hand according to what is possible by equation second; and then put on it a plaster and bandage, if you need those, and then strengthen that.
And if you feel cartilages broken in it, then cover that, and hold that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the  anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication in the extremities of those and they are incised in the length and decline to the parts of the intestines; and if it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you engage that according to how it is fitted to you by equation engage until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long one or that already declines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have engaged it, put on it a plaster, and then put on it a bandage of cloth or of bandage, and strengthen by stricture over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And engage the concavity with water that fills it until that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or over their side.
But if you see abscess cauter, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is cauterized, and put on it water that sits it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as you cover.
And if you see in the cartilages or they are comminuted, then you put them together.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the  arm.
Arm is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is the one that you take a stick of medium thickness according to this form:
And there are tied at two extremities two bandages, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a stool; and then throw out his broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the stick.
And then hang on it some heavy cause, or the minister extends that to the lower parts; and then the doctor and that the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns according to what is covered.
And the other way is that the patient be raised on their neck and suspend the arm of his collar with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below of it; and each of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover that the half of the bandage is put on the citillic and the other below the fracture of the joint.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the joint, then cover that the bandage is put on that place and on that joint.
Gently guide her with ease and her work, and as soon as she is well-guided according to what is convenient and applied properly, then strengthen her if no abscess occurs after cautery.
But if an abscess occurs after cautery, then leave the stricture for seven days, and place upon it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then you strengthen her.
And the way to strengthen her is that you place a plaster on the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open on her muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm be in place of stars, if no prohibits this any cause of the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place on the fracture that star that is pus wide and pus strong of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and be the length of the stars according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the stricture which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture over the place of the fracture be pus straight. And as much as it is elongated the fracture be the stricture lesser.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the stricture as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear abscess caut, then you leave the stricture and the stars for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no abscess occurs in the place proximate or inflammation; or it is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of stricture; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are on confidence that no cause of this occurs, then do not untie the bandage until after three days or more.
And be the sleep of the patient on his back, and his hands on his stomach.
And place on the support a cushion full of wool well-guided, and consider in all hour of the night or of the day that not be undone nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that be the ligament softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have said before, in such a way that the food be subtle in the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then when it thickens the food of him.
For of custom of the support and of the bed of him is that they be strengthened for 40 days; and then when they be untied and be administered bath and be medicated with poultices those which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid rubbed, then you do not untie of that the bandage and the stars for a day or for two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two focils; of which one is small, and that is the one that sees the finger placed, and the other is great and that is the one that is placed below the little finger, from the part further back.
And strong there is broken the greater focil alone, or the little one, and strong there are broken together.
And when is broken the little focil above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when is broken the focil of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the little focil above, then it is convenient to the physician, must the restoration of it, that place small extension with ease until that be well-guided.
But if the great focil is that which is broken, then it is that you place extension more vehement.
And if the two focils are together broken, then it is that you place the extrication more strong.
And how you place the figure of the hand, you must the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more high than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a fallen cushion.
And be a cushion in front of him in the height or straightness of him, so that the patient not incurve work.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part further back with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends above seemingly.
And then the physician guides the bones while reducing that according to the best figure that it can.
And if in the facture of the bone there are splinters, then you pierce to reduce all that in its place with your virtue.
And if appears in it splinter separated that punishes the bone and is not to your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish upon it and remove that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plaque, I have already made a singular chapter about it, and therefore take the cure of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and make it between subtlety and thickness, and tighten the cloth over it with a subtle structure until the abscess is yielded; and then remove the cerate and place a prepared plaster of powdered flour mixed with egg white, and place stars; and let the star be the one placed over the fracture, pus laider and stronger.
And know that the name of the stars of the arm is seen in the greatest arrangements, or whether the fracture is in one focus or in two foci together.
And place your structure over the place of the fracture, stronger and more vehement, and as much as the constriction is above the fracture or below it, place the constriction a little more soft according to how it is preceded the recollection of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened be of the proper measure between subtle and thick, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the joint near a few days. And if any cause occurs for which rectification is necessary, as prudently as the one that occurs to the limb, and then cover that you embroil the limb with warm water until that prudence ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the constriction.
And if the constriction is already softened and the bone is already remade and seems to those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb by superfluity of constriction, for then cover that you soften it a little and let it for a few days until it runs to it the nourishment, and then tighten it.
But if the patient does not occur any cause of those that we have said, then cover that it not be untied within about 20 days or thereabouts of those.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of agitated movement, and make him sleep upon his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or strong it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that to the thumb of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers, tart end should fracture, and do not occur to them but attrition many times.
And when a fracture or attrition occurs in the hand, then cover that the patient follow straight and in front of him lies the center according to equality, and then place the hand of him over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them until they are conjoined with good conjunction.
And then cover that you place plaster and cotton, if no abscess occurs; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to tighten it with his fractured palm; then it be tightened with long cloth.
And let the star be of leather with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the leather be applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what cover.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then cover that you place stars above and another star from the lower part in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight; and then place the constriction, as it is revolved the hand to the back between the fingers with joints.
And if a fracture occurs to one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if the finger is put, be aligned according to what cover and then be tightened with the palm and if you want, place a small straight star to it so that the fracture be elevated and not be harmed.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle location, or in the index, or in the ring finger, then be aligned and tied with the finger that is next to it; or be all tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place upon it a small star, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscesses and oppose — with your operation — with what cover when any cause of those occurs, according to how the narration of it is iterated.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip many times is broken and is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front part and to the most sovereign.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient be prostrate upon his belly and upon his face.
And then the minister extends the whole ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then the ligament is pulled to the side of the hip, so that the extension falls upon it, and the other ligament is left at the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the hip, then the ligament is pulled to the hip, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bones with both of his hands until it is reduced according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by a good connection; then cover with plaster and a splint, if not, an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The splint is made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove the superfluity; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the knee and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the leg from the hip to the knee, and the ends of the strip come from the side of the two parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh that which is superfluous of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh at the place of that fracture splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint on the middle of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you go further with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your splint should be smaller and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the strip to the parts below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on it, so that it does not occur to the limb corruption or abscess, or swelling, and similar to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then cut you from it, and rectify what has occurred again, as we have said many times.
But if in the bone is a piece of the bone which puts, then cover that according to what is possible to you; and if not, cut on it and remove that, and cure with that of which is preceded the recollection until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with other things that are adjusted to it, as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a manner made, do not occur to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, with another thing that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he should limp from the one that is always.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
Know that a fracture of the hip joint is very difficult, but it often occurs with many complications.
But if it occurs to it fracture, then it is not but a fissure or a crack in its parts, and that is with a plate or several plates, and above all is it put with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is aligned what is broken of its parts with the said pieces until it is aggregated and joined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place on it a round splint, if you need it; and strengthen above with a splint to what is convenient.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as abscess, or similar to those, so that it opposes all accidents to what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called by the name of the tibia; and the other is thin, and it is called fibula.
And it occurs to some of the species of fracture that occurs to both bones of the leg, and for that reason is made restoration of it as well as restoration of the arm aligned, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the parts in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it is lowered below, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension and equation and ligation of the splints according to that alignment.
But however, cover, if the fracture of the leg is small having many splints, that the extension be less and more lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the stars and that you complete all your operation, then you will take splints of wood of the kind which is placed under the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made of palm branches; some of those to which is small thickness, and not be of the man-made, and be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the foot.
And then envelope over each strip in two envelopes according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and be from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremities and in the middle place, for with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending on the right and left side, and it stands for good standing.
And already is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And most of all cover that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly plague.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by following study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or other causes similar; and when happens any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with that which cover within that it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and of the bones of the foot and of the digits.
To the talus no happens fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot happens fracture some times; and to the digits of the foot few happens fracture, and no happens to them but attrition in the most of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and times those bones be elevated above themselves among them, then the patient pause his foot on the earth prepared as if they were going.
And then pause the one foot over that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and equalize those within that they return in the places.
And then pause plaster and stopa over, and pause under the belly of the foot a small table to which be two caps placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot with structure descent, because that you has enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which indigeys.
And when to it pass three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because that you find the bones equalized, or be broken or be dislocated, and the operation in those is as with coneysses.
But if some digits are broken, then restore those, and equalize those as if you and recount to you in the restoration of the digits of the hand. And then pause to the broken digit a splint according to the length of the digit, and be more wide of it a little; and under the foot this table the which and to you recounted, and strengthen that with structure decent.
But if that which is broken of the bones so two or three or more, then you pause over each digit a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing over one of the caps of the table hole the belly of the foot so that it have with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which that have said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with that which cover.
Chapter XVIII.
Of fracture of the hip of the woman and of the bone of the pubis and of the groin of the man.
When the hip of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a cradled bed, and then incline that to the part of the back a little, and be held behind.
And then the matron impla the hip of cloth, and be made in the hip of it as if she were hoping; and then the woman be concuted, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is fore-gotten within that it be before the part of the hip as if she were hoping and the broken bone returns.
And then pause pillows over the back of her, and when she wants to urinate removes the cloth with facility and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you must that at the beginning, and then return to her first pillow.
And do so for vii days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the track of her a tube of cane; and introduce all the bladder in the hip of her, and then insufflate in the tube with virtue within that the bladder be inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then be filled with cloth and stay for some days according to that we have recounted, within that it be healed.
And when the bone of the pubis of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it that which we have recounted in the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these proper fractures and which few understand, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my book word; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via of the straight in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the man's groin when it is broken, take gauze of oak, and put the groin in it; and then place a cloth wrap over it, and be wrapped, and then be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is with a plague.
It is convenient to him to whom accidents fracture with plague, and more so if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or the humerus, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize that as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to the retention of it as much as you pulverize over it zig zag, if to you another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong that, if you do not happen abscess.
But if an abscess happens, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is given, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will make happen bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is eminent over the uncovered hip, then you must perforate to reduce it and equal it with your hands with facility and with little extension.
But if extension is not to you prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or of eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepares of those three or four according to the quantity that indicates to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And be round, and be in it little thickness so that it not be bent of the compression over it in the hour of the operation.
And be of acute extremity at which be margin in its extremities; and be the use of it to thickness tending, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is a little palette.
For that it must be placed the extremity of it attends elevated over the extremity of the bone eminent.
And impel it in one movement until the bone returns, and be equalized with some equation.
And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with that which we have recommended, then incisions it with that which convieneys to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in any manner that be to you possible.
And then ratz that which remain in the bone of asperities and of small scorcas.
And as the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient suffers vehement pain leading, then you know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer to the patient great benefit.
As it is completed your restoration which you make to the bone, and then submerge cloth in black styptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague cerot nor other cause in which be oil, so that it not make in it happen  poudred and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you incisions the tract with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done that the foolish physicians, and have made happen over their patients death or illness corrupt or violently, so it is healed. And if your stricture lighter, soft, diverse from the stricture of the other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is bad plague, and you fear over it some accidents bad which we have recommended, and you suffer pain in the place, then you must not place over it stelas, but make to it wrapping of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And as soon as one day or two times already the plague begins, that in it be engendered brac, then you take off from it the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer calques, engentz with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, as engentz tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And convieneys to you that you untie the bandage and consider the plague in each day morning and evening until it be consolidated and fixed, and that the member be prepared in such manner that the poudered run from it to the parts below with facilitated.
If the plague lasts many days, and the arm is not consolidated or separated from it, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones so that you can inquire about the plague with a tenta. And of those satagias, those that are separated they remove and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the member and make them have pain, pierce you to incisor those according to what to you is possible.
And if it happens to the plague a suppuration or elephantiasis, it is a kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must put on each of those with what convenes to them of the cure of which is preceded the narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you must know the best speech and you make present your own: when the bone is broken, elevate the member as the bone of the thigh and the auxiliary and similar to those of the large members, and that you do not presume to traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times it happens through this death; have left that within that you can, for very soon it will fall by itself about twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if to you is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of nodules that happen in the trace of any fracture.
Many times this nodulation happens in the trace of healing of a fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and it is disfigured by it the figure of the member; and very soon prohibits the member of its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the nodulation is recent and administer in that medicines that have styptic as such as aloes, and incense, and mira, and scarce, and acridity, and similar to those; in this way that you take of that some or all, and combine those with styptic wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar, and place that on the nodulation in a bandage, and bind those on it for good constriction.
And leave the constriction that do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until that the nodulation is healed; or strengthen on that a lamina of lead descentment, for lead has property to heal all that is inflated in the members.
But if the nodulation is already in a worse converted and tightened is and necessity provokes to take out that coitadament, and then cut that by the part most sovereign of it, and incisor the superfluity and elevate, or rat that with some rezoris until that it is healed; and cure that until that it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and then what remains the member subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then what remains the member subtle and frail, then that is not done but for many causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of it made not according to what is coven; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until that the nourishment be prohibited to run to the member; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for scarcity of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And cure of that is to give to the patient to eat less and make his heart tender until that the blood be multiplied in him; and administer baths; and intermingle joy and happiness on him.
And then place a poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with warm water, until that the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .xxii.
Of the cure of the broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of what is coven.
When it happens to the member already restored the healing of it from crookedness and eminence to the broken bone and nodule, and it is for that feared the form of the member, but however the member is not prohibited of its natural operation, then you must not receive the word of that one who exists that member be of new broken.
But already so many foolish physicians and restorers the ones who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable, losing a great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if lameness and nodulation are recent, then you must have them embrocated with warm water in which are put softening herbs, such as are the flowers of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made a plaster with softening plaster as diallagulon well made; or that be taken a poultice of roots of altea and be contused with gray of guanine or with olive oil, and be plastered with that; or that be taken fig leaves fat and be crushed with dove's dung, and similar to those of the medicines that are called amermans consolidation.
And some times it is dissolved with assiduous friction lighter that be with the hands humid, and be administered movement of the member to all parts at all hours.
But if crookedness already is gone before and is made strong and converted is in worse and provoked is necessity to cure of it with iron, then you must have it the most desus ceased and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and be incisor that superfluous of nodule of that meteys with the bone with subtle incisors, and be administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of the body, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is altered, and it brings great pains and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when an accident occurs to any dislocation, it is necessary to immediately try to reduce it, and not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to be bad or stretched during the time of inflammation, for many times it brings spasms and terrible pains.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you take care of the patient's groin, and let it rest while the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be wrapped with warm water and oil, and then it should be reduced with ease.
And all member should be cured with that which the remembrance will come back to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what precedes in fracture; from the part of the body more sovereign to the part less so.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are dislocated if they are not treated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: that they are slightly displaced from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated by a complete dislocation and complicated, so that they are softened at the junction where the saliva of the patient flows and that he cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped in his word.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary that a reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from inside his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts his two thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands are outside with which he supports; and he commands the patient to cease his jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor pushes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to reduce it, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer vaporization with warm water and oil, until a lighter reduction of both is made and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are set, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place on them powders of cloth with cerot, and it is made of wax and oil rubbed; and it is applied with ease with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not strain either to the right or to the left; and do not let him chew for any cause; having his food be forbidden for a long time, until the pains are reduced and the jaws are healed, then let him chew what he wants.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking, until the jaw is healed and sound.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and are not returned to their places, then many times this happens fever and persistent diarrhea, and very much the belly of the patient is affected, and very much and pure yellow bile is vomited.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times he dies to whom this happens within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place from between by its continuation with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared to the touch.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with great force, so that it will return.
And then place on that plaster and powder and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which is joined and continued to it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and set according to what we have said and according to what is to your arrangement.
And then place on that plaster, and powder, and strapping, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this same cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the part above the muscle, and this is done hard; and it is not dislocated to the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the parts in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and pushed out to the parts below the thigh, and mostly in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of them is inflamed with an abscess cautery, and it is cured by that which it is already dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you know this before you are over-certain of it, and then you will proceed in the cure of it.
And it is known that the dislocation of it is when it is in the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you find between those manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle concavity and below the thigh of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a bowl, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it in any way.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and then you find manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates his hand to the parts above; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates his hand, and extends that upwards; and then places that below where it returns slightly.
But if by what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in lukewarm water and be administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were made of  coytz, rue, fennel, and melilot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient be laid on his back and be placed below the thigh of him, waiting for a pad that is between light and tightness, and the physician places his heel on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not bad to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not bad to the parts below, for that instantly returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stands on that side, and interlaces his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates his thigh to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him that another cause be suspended, so that it is heavy, for the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long rod be placed on the ground, the head of which is round in figure, as if a mortar, that it is not thick nor thin, and then it is placed below the patient; because on the head of the rod are placed lion cloths, and the patient stands according to the length of the rod, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use of this cure: and it is that you take a rod the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and the width of it is of four digits, and the thickness of it is adjusted in the preon of the thigh according to this form:
And on the round head are placed lion cloths so that the rod does not hurt the patient.
And then it is placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm is extended over the rod into the parts below, and the rod is tied over the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand is extended to the parts below, and the other body is suspended from the other part, for the joint enters instantly.
And as the entering of it is completed in any manner that is possible to you, then it is necessary that you place below the thigh a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of molli with eggs and album of hen over the whole muscle, so that it is rolled upwards, and then strength below the thigh with decent tightness; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him is attached to the neck of him, and it is left, and the hand of him is not moved for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be little, while the limb is comforted, for it is more light to the healing of it.
And then the food should be given more around the seventh or fifth and an exercise is carried out; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or by another cause, then it is necessary that in that one be administered cautery with three trauchs, according to that which is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the strapping are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot raise that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already severed or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And another strapping should be administered in that, and care should be taken of that until it is healed.
And if it happens that near the healing gravity falls in the limb and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is alleviated and that it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and mostly to the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not disguised to you, because it is evident by the movement or by the touch according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the hand, that is to you declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that its muscle.
And you must cover those hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a cautery abscess, because if it comes to a cautery abscess, the reduction is difficult, and it is not healed of all; and especially when it is in the back parts, because it is worse of all the other kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many times they die from it.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be upon the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands together, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns as if it bends the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it not be retracted from the extension.
And about it be revolved the arm of all parts, because it is enveloped in a long folded cloth over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint that with some oil so that that be those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and about it pushes the joint with a vehement impulse until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is necessary that it be placed upon that plaster in which there is sticking and padding with album of egg, and it be extended with a descending strapping, and the arm be suspended from the collar, and be left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you reiterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and after it is loosened.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause upon the junction alleviated, so it is a matter of heavy motion; and about it be bound, and leave it over the bones the day and the night. And about it is placed, and put that in bath; and when it dries, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and about it reiterate upon that alleviated, so it is a matter of motion, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already reached the tooth inside the mouth, while it is still lined.
And if you want, pause upon that cleft of wet cow and scalded with border and strengthen upon it; and do that some times, because that is wet and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the malassen, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is lighter, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however it is necessary that it be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is apostematized or that it happens in it apostema caut.
And the reduction of the dislocation of that is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the minister extends the hand of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it inward until it returns to its place.
But however, it must be considered if the palm is already placed in the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table, over the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent, then the back of the hand, so that the position of the hand of that intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand lies on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with a poultice, yielding the abscess and leaving it; and do not repeat this, for if not, do not suffer nor can you on the reduction of it more than days pass by it.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not put any cause to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are broken or cut, and then there is no other way than to strengthen it with a cautery near the place of it and strongly do this, conferring any cause.
Therefore, when the bad limb is returned, then place on it the poultice which have you recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and then it is removed and left, and the hand of it is exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and any gravity falls on it, then gently that with water and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated of those at the back of the palm or in the belly of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend it until straight it is healed in that day.
And when night comes, bind that according to that narration, and do not cease to unbind that in the day and exercise with movement, and bind that at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do similarly with this, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and bind that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When a dislocation complicated of any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck occurs, and the movable vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that there is no cure, for death takes hold of the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain that; and many times are softened some limbs of him or both legs of him or both arms of him, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, for many times it is removed and many times the removal of those in four parts is made.
Therefore, that is already removed to the parts behind and is called gelbositis.
But the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbositis occurs from puerility, for then in that there is no cure nor from that there is healing of all.
But in that which comes from a blow or percussion or similar to those, the Ancients already said the ways of cure with verbose sermons, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I have already shortened it from that of which the little excuse of the too much of it, for my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have this exposed and formed from diverse instruments of that with which I will show this and expose that.
And of those there is no cure except that which occurs in the back properly with that which I have recomposed.
And that the patient be extended on his face, with one arm propped near a wall, and the other arm stretched out below him so that the feet of him are not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, stuck in the ground at the extremity of the arm near the head of it, and another stick in the opposite extremity of the arm, holding the feet of him.
And the minister holds the stick, and it is not held in a ditch; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then envelop over the head of the patient and below the limbs lie firmly; and extend the extremity of the limb to the stick which is opposite the head of it, and bind that in it; and then strengthen the other ligament on the hips of him the knees of him, and below the legs of him; and then adjust all the ligaments and bind those in the other stick which is opposite the feet of him.
And then the minister, having carefully extended the ligament to the place of the shaft, and not having moved the two shafts and ligaments from their places where they are placed, but however, not having stopped as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or who places upon it a table, and then adjusts upon the table his feet while it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air of three spans, and carve in the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which the extremity of the table. And then place the majority of the table upon the spine, and the doctor places his feet upon the other extremity, and tightens well until the spine is shortened and returns to its place.
And if you want, open with a turn the one which is revolved with the hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the fist two shafts, the length of which is of an arm, and place the head of him in the rear of the fist also two shafts; and be the length that is between each shaft a palm, and already is made in each shaft a hole in which runs the turn, and each one is fixed on the ground so that it is not bad.
And be also a shaft round in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two holes of the two shafts.
And in the extremity of it is a hole in which is formed the shaft, the length of which is a palm with what is revolved; and in the two other shafts is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened in the feet of the patient in the hole which is of the head of him, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of him in the turn which is of the feet of him.
And then place each turn and stay a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover with a plaster of drying with album of egg, and then tow; and then place upon the plaster a table of which the width is three fingers or around those, and the length of it is the quantity that embraces the place of the belly, and upon the part of the spine it is.
And then bind with the ligaments which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if there remain any prominence in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines be administered which soften and cleanse with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a sheet of lead.
And some times accidents happen prominence in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrudes because it is not necessary that it be done proscription to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you happen death.
Chapter .XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the junction of the hip and the junction of the muscle should not be only dislocation, and accidents happen to those that happen to the other junctions of small movement and concavity.
And the junction of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the front parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the front parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the sick one, it is longer and the bone is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot towards the knee, and it is the place that if the knee is positioned with a cauterized abscess, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation is to the back parts, is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the front parts is that it expands its leg according to its complement, but however it does not bend that which causes pain in the bone, and if it is forced to go and cannot go over that to the front parts; and the urine of him is retained and the groin of him is cauterized, and it is necessary to walk with him on the heel.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the back parts is that it does not expand the bone, nor can it bend that which bends the groin, and the leg of him is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is of that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already anchored with that one, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it is not necessary that in that one be done proscription.
But in the case of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you take hold of it so that you can turn the joint and extend it to the inside parts and the outside parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will return quickly and does not need other care.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the patient from the back, or by his hands, or with a bandage which is tied around the leg below the knee; and another minister extends the hand of the one below so that he puts his hands below the heels of the patient; and then tighten with a bandage around the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And the extension of him or from the inside part to the angle of the shoulder, or from the back part to the part of the loins.
And the extension of all those at once while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species to what I will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inside parts, then the patient must be laid on his side; and then place the ligaments on the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is below the shoulder; and then extend the ligaments above the part of the shoulder to the highest part of the shoulder blade.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and grasps the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extends to the outside parts by vehement extension, for that returns to its place.
And this species is of the lighter cure with which this limb is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused over you and does not obey to the entrance with this species of cure of all, then it must be tied the two legs of the patient together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each one of its parts is the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the pole, and that he is in the middle; and the length of him from the ground is the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and that the patient is suspended with another young man, and the other young man lessen the thigh with strength and impulsion, for the joint returns to its place with velocity.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the outside part, then the patient must lie on his back as we have recounted in the having of the dislocation; and be tightened the bandage on the leg of the patient properly and on his feet.
And then two poles are placed, one to the feet of him, and the other to the head; and then poles are placed adjusted to the middle of the bed on which wet cloths are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged because the pole is between his thighs, for that the extension to the inside parts is not pulled.
And then each minister extends his part, and the physician with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the inside parts, then the leg must be extended lightly, and it is according to this same narration on the back; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the shoulder of the patient, and then he cuts that with the other hand, and with that cutting he pauses that extended to the inside parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the outside parts, then the patient must not be extended to the inside parts, and it is elevated over the ground; it must be placed on a hard cause, as well as if the dislocated part is in the outside parts, according to what we have said of the placing of it on two widths; and it is on his back and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it must be administered compression with a table on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what you must — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and is that you extend the two legs of the patient, and when you see those engulfs and the patient extends his leg and expands that excuse, then you know that the limb according to what you must is returned — and then you adjust two thighs and pause plaster and extend with a bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the bandage and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those joints in alignment, then you know the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and plaster that, and stretch that according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then unwrap that, and make that person delay walking for a while, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts in front to the back parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can above that; adhere your two to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the shoulder of it to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the shoulder of it with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with light no-labor.
And then plaster that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together at once with a bandage for three days or for four, and then unwrap those.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is sprained by small movement, and some times is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the sprain of it is of light reduction, and is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, cover that you make the patient straight, and hold that one minister strong and valiant of the back part of it in the middle place of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most behind the foot in the place of the heel.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right of the thigh the leg works.
And do this two times according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the thigh the third time, and you are at the heel.
Therefore, if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, because that returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of it with what we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a  piece of cloth on the ground fixed, and that it lies between the thighs of it, and you have already enveloped over it cloth so that it does not prick the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with a ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the cloth be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of it not be pulled to the back parts of its extension.
And then the physician aligns the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the sound thigh to the back parts, because the dislocation returns with the ease.
And therefore, when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then place plaster and extend that with ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligaments to the thigh.
And cover that you fear or you guard yourself from the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over it not be vehement and damage it strongly.
And then leave that for two days or for three; and if the ligament is softened, extend that.
And then unwrap that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for forty days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done safely that the dislocation not be over it dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if it happens to it abscess caut, then cover that you administer in the reduction of it what in the beginning of our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is sprained.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Have that which is dislocated be enveloped with little extension of its work; and that which is not difficult, raise it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the heel of the foot, then have the patient place their foot on a level surface of the earth or on a table, and be standing thus as if they were walking.
And then stand near the foot, and place your foot upon that which is above the joints, and then press it with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see it already enveloped and does not appear in the eminence.
And then place under the foot of the patient a table that supports the whole foot, which has two heads, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and have the patient refrain from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the species of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
When any of those causes happen, and you engage in the cure of it and its restoration, many times death ensues.
And for this reason, you should not presume over the cure of it, but rather that one who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not bold nor presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses only so much, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the sickness, and in which you appear some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess is formed.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we desire, then administer the regimen which causes an abscess and cures the plague with what is convenient to it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and happens in the bones shattered and separated, then you pierce the stem of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple ailments of this that is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the treatment in the ways of fear according to what has preceded me in my preaching; for this is better, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly from which God be blessed. Amen.
