O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its fulfillment, its end is achieved in it, and by its expositions and by its declarations, it is my view that you complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the operation with my hand, that is, surgery.
Because the operation with the hand is laid low in our region and in our time completely private, while it is greatly perilous the science of it, and its knowledge is held hostage; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and become subject to those errors and misunderstandings, because the clauses of it are understood and the strength of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you vivify that with the ordering of this treatise in that according to the way of exposition and of declaration and of abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand is found in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that it behoves the actor of it to be exercised before that in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia in that it knows the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and the separation of them; and he has the knowledge of the bones, of the nerves and of the vessels, and the number of those, and the egress of them; and of the pulsating veins and of the quiet ones, and of the places of the emission of them.
And for that, it is said by Hippocrates that with a name it is little, but in the work great, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; for who is not learned in that which we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he will not fall into error for which many men die, thus as I have seen too many of those, who some are formed in this science and cast themselves from that their science and their experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck for which flowed great blood while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that the trachea of a man who had processed in his state, and the stone was great, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for that man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that by the greatness of the stone and by the disposition of the patient I knew above him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he was given a black cravat who was broken in the thigh of him; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, above the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then he dismissed him according to his desires, and he bound him, and he left him for some days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and thus it was that the thigh and the foot became infected, and he came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and I appeared to untie the ligament, and achieved tranquility and then eased his pains.
But however, already corruption was confirmed in the limb, for that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the malignancy of it was magnified to his lord.
The cause is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it behoves that it may not come to it with iron of all, but that it be in a member the which suffers that of all it be held hostage.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary to you that the operation with the hand be devised in two divisions: that is in operation to that which is associated with health, and in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed that in all places of this book in which I come operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary to you that you guard this and leave that, so that the foolish do not attain a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore take your arms with solicitude and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and laudable success, and leave the maladies terrible of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more it remains to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia has already said in some of his admonitions: "Do not meddle with bad malady, so that bad physicians you not be called."
And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head within feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to them, all chaptered and ordered of the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to them; chapter ordered of the head within feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its inconveniences, and in what completion it should be prohibited cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its inconvenience is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already of it has spoken a great multitude of wise men, and of it they have disagreed, and to me suffices a little of the sermons of theirs, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery conforms to every completion universally which is in matter or has matter, except for two complections, which are complections caused by its matter.
In the completion caused and dry with matter they disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient is that illness caused and dry with that which is caut and dry be healed.
And say that one who says the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all illness caused and dry which comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the completion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the sermon of that, that experience this already to me some times has discovered.
But however, it does not behoove that it comes upon this one who already is experienced and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complections, there is no fear upon you, and more so in the illnesses cold and humid, because already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and they do not disagree in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, children, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, is that fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and not to the other member with it attached except with slight inconvenience.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are far from it, and strongly makes it come in the member illness of difficult healing and strongly its use.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do that except that it superfluously escapes, and already it is to us known by experiment and by length of service of study with the art upon the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused of the length of the sermon and if it were not that it is not written in my book in this pause to you secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which expels the illnesses, with a philosophical sermon demonstrative, the which would be acute in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree of the time in which it is convenient to make cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, because that the inconvenience by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is thrown, and more so if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than slight inconvenience entering by time.
And thus do not catch in your minds, o, children, that this is not esteemed but by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, because it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not thus as they think of that, because cautery is nothing but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidities which are cause for that pains come.
But however, cautery superfluously over medicine by the desire of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at any hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of it of the addition of the superfluities in it, and that which is reached to it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that the illness in which cautery is administered be illness subtle in member of few superfluities and humidities, as cautery of tooth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but that it is made in smalls.
And most commonly it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said rightly, for I do not understand it in this, because I believe that it is not a cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is contrary to this; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the ways of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it profits to that. And therefore, that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, it is not according to the understanding which the common people and most of the foolish physicians understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen it and have found that it does not do so except in some bodies where others do not, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you make cautery with fire of gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want by the heat of the gold, and that it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts by the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the artisan catches by the occupation of that.
And for this reason, cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more carefully to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that afterward the one asking for it knows what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness over the nerve accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the ears flowing, and multitude of sleep, and of toothache and of the goiter, and universally of all disease that comes from coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that exHiggins the virtue of the patient and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then make that seizure between your hands on a fallen bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his heels. But however, as your saying of the middle place has been reached, sign that place with a tenta, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that upon the place signed with a tenta, in the manner that it descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of grain of errs, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone that I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a poultice enclosed in border and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with tetrafarmacon ointment until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that it should be cauterized the bone inside the bone, and that the cautery should be kept until some part of the surface of the bone is burned.
And then scrape that which is burned of the bone, and then it should be cured.
And others said that with the cautery it should reach the end, until it presses into the bone forcefully until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate that from that place expire the vapors of the head.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and leave that, of me, it is better for health, when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of it as well as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better of me; and of that one I use and with that work with health.
Second Chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When throughout the head occurs chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of herbs and ointments and capipures and plasters and guats and cadels and gualinas and semblantz, and mostly if already it has been cauterized with a cautery which is recounted and does not benefit him any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of a strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds a great burning, then that cauterizes with another cautery besides that one a little. And then cauterizes that one on the horn of his head with a cautery until the coda is parted. Incise the coda and make it uncovered of the bone the quantity which we have recounted and cauterizes that one with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and is that place in which is placed a cupping glass. And alleviate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient by this finds much great pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of old-not-new migraine.
When in the part of the head pain is felt suddenly, or is stretched pain within the eye, be evacuated with medicines the head modifying, and be administered the other cure, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and all does not benefit, then cauterization in it is in two ways: or cauterization with acute medicine burning, or with iron.
But cauterizing with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alh, and scour that one and cut off the extremities of it from both the heads. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet wide until there is made a place left the bone, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopped by descent constriction, and leave that for the spaces of three hours; and then untie the and take out the alh, and leave the plague for two or three days, and then place over it a cloth submerged in boder until the place makes a scab.
And then cure that with an enguent until it is healed.
And if you want, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But the cauterization with iron according to this manner:  ignite with a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called claus clavilhs, because the head of it is as if in the form of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is left is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the thickness of the bone as much as the majority of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery is not burned which is left, so that no flux of blood comes.
And then imbibe cloth in salt water and place that over the place, and leave that for three days; and then place cloth crushed with boder, and then cure with an enguent until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize with the extremity of the knife according to cautery, and guard yourself from incision of artery in this migraine properly old-not-new.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of old migraine.
When you cure migraine with that which we have said of the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and it does not benefit the cure, and sometimes by the illness that does not reach him that which we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then you must ignite the knife cautery until it is white-hot, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which it is the majority of the said, or which one; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen that one until you incise the artery and it reaches into the bone.
However, it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is bad for chewing, and that the lacert is not burned and the nerve which hurts that one, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flux of blood of the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and more to that one who ignores that which is done and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation in it at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the regiment of flux of blood accident of the artery according to its manner, in its place of this book.
And if you see of this illness that this cauterization does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that one in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization of arteries, using a cautery having two handles, and this is a better and more convenient cauterization.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear pain comes from cold and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
And when you point it to the ignition, and it is moved around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever. Lengthen it with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little as if you were feeling the place with your finger.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and which one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of tumors.
The tumor which is cured and with cauterization is nothing but of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with leeches and purgatives and gargles, and if you do not feel comfort in your cure, then you must cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first you must at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healing.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, as sovereign a little above the corner of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special kind of the cutlery, the form of which is shown opposite. But more however more subtle is that one a little as if you were seeing; and where the handle in it of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with what is oppositely shown until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure that with what we have said and if you do not feel comfort in your medication and the disease has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the nape. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it be cured with what you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
And if they are to be given to the patient at the beginning leeches large and pills the serving modifying.
And then shave the head of the whole patient and pause on the nape of him a plaster of cente described in the treatise of plasters.
And pause that several times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part furthest down of the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with what is proceeded.
But if you add more and the patient is that tolerant, then make to him cauteries in the middle place; and if you want more addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
And cover that you proceed in softening of the head with leeches and with what we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with cautery in the middle place of the head, and with cautery above all the horns of the head, and with cautery above the rear part of it, and with three cauteries above the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of too much this and the diseases tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries above the vertebrae of the loins, and certainly with cautery until it is burned of the cord of it, and elevate your hand. And then carefully tend to the one who is being healed, and this cautery olive.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, unless that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if one modifies the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer soothing and masticating  to the modified brain, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each corner of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries as I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And cauterize olive as it has been preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cauteries subtle according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent torticolla of him on the circle, and then place that on the middle location of the head.
And let the patient be kept sitting, and be held from all parts.
And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of border anti-c of sheep. And warm that on the fire to a moderate heat by measure, which the said one suffers when it is most in him. And then pour that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him enter that it be cooled.
And make water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that he be healed; or if you will, cauterize this by making small points according to the best of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery so arranged: this is a special type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that coated in border or in grease of guinea fowl.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of him, and guard him from all humidities.
And make him sweat in a bath in degu for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of the ysement of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left on the codena; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see of him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and with the abscess of those and the caution of fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the heels are old and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluity frozen phlegmatic, then cauterize him with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water chasing in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you need additions, then cauterize him in all the length of the heel's tail on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of nasal stench.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to drink to the patient the cochias for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with a cautery olive. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries above the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little.
And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter .xv.
Of cautery of softening of eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all part, and they be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter .xvi.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of it and prick the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of it so that they prick the eye, cauterize in those in two manners, for cauterize or is with fire or is with medicine cauterizing.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of that which he may see his hairs as those which they cleanse, until they be prolonged and equal; and if prick that you must then strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it be not bad until the hairs be born.
Therefore, as they are born and equal, then place the head of the patient in your knee, and then send upon the eyelid of the eyes of him with a tent, with a sign which be according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil of honey or in a poultice of ptilli upon the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize upon the figure which you have signed, little by little, in many times, until it be burned the surface of the  code which is as a leaf of myrtle, all apparently.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the prick of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then place upon it a cloth with border until the scar be healed. And then cure that with an enema until it be healed.
But if returns for the hairs any cause to their prick and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery upon that as you had done first.
But if the hairs be in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not prick the eye.
But the cautery with medicine cauterizing this is that you command the patient that he may see the hairs until they be prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take of sabot known and of live cause one. i., that is,
And place the said upon the medicine and press that a little and not the badness until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it as of fire.
And therefore as it will persevere that the burning biting, then leave the medicine and put that with your hand; therefore as it ceases the biting, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it is washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if not return upon that of the medicine upon the place in which it has not put the medicine and not be degraded until it be equal your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place upon it a cloth with border until the scar of the cauterization be healed, and then cure that with an enema of defaicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the eye not fall any of the medicine, and if the eyelid apropos some days is softened and some cause of the hairs prick in the eye, then iterate your medicine upon that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then enaviro it until it be healed.
And this is the form of a leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And the way of rectum should not be hidden from him who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of the ailments and do not confer your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a manner that it not be disturbed nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth infused in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the form of a cane or a vulture's feather, of one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it shall be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you wish, it shall be shaped as a tentacle.
But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it blood and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which be well ignited, and hold with that your hand a little from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grains of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates into the bone, well is it; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it were necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and surround it with an exsiccating enguent until it be healed.
But if after ten days it is not healed, then place on it a medicine acute corrosive until the bone be uncovered and be scraped according to what you convene in your chapter.
And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first said:  Enter into the location of the fistula and make a cut there, and then place in that fissure a fine cautery of which is the form: And melt in that the quantity of one ounce of lead; and hold your hand with cautery with good retention, and do not disturb the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place on the heel of the patient a cloth infused in oil or in water, because lead hardens the location of the fistula and heals it by miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with that which we have said of the cautery and the cure, well is it; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its place properly.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures happen in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with that which we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form that is enclosed:
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that ignited cautery carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there happens an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is antiquated, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure that and do not profit from the cure, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited one in the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it reaches the iron ignited to the bottom of it, and at the back of it do so once or twice; and then cure that with that which we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the wound is abscised and is healed, well is it; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the location and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the angivas.
When the angivas are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come nearby so that you place the cautery on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
And then take your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out, for the bad tooth is stopped, the softened gums are strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or a worm is in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take the horn of a cow and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the tip of the tentacle, and then dip that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly,  until it is seared.
And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cloth in the heated horn above, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the handle of the iron or of the fire, and that there is some thickness in its center and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery is seared; and do this several times because the pain will be subdued either on that day or the next day.
And cover that after the cauterization the patient rinses his mouth with good water and keeps it there for an hour, then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize with whatever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines, and you wish to slightly digest those, then you ignite the cautery whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke escapes from the cautery through the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a cloth soaked in water on top of it until that which the fire has burned is subdued.
And then cure that with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
When the humors come upon the throat of the lungs, and most especially when that is of cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the root of the goiter in the depressed location.
And be careful that you do not reach the cautery to the goiter nor burn the flesh of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of it be a clove according to the previous manner.
And then cure that with water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the breastbone in the depressed locations of the left and right sides; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot between the two toes; and let the cautery be a clove according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure that with water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three ramps because cauterization is done in this way: in one time you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the tic that is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and through a slight movement it is dislocated as it should, as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and then have the patient lie on their back or on their side; and then elevate the flesh which is in the front part of the neck to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is dislocated to the front part.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the chain while it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be that of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are .viii. cauteries.
And then place on the cautery a porous cloth with salt, and then make the patient adhere to the splint, and the limb not be moved for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or with a cauterizing motz, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes a burning in the stomach and many humidities that cause that extraction from its complexion and so multiply sores in it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then when the patient is on his two sides, and extends his hands and his thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery on the foot for the quantity of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of cautery comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a perforation.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form addition, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach pointed to that one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you place your hand on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with the tendon, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the liver fire.
When there comes pain in the liver from heat or from humidity or from excessive windiness so that from its normal complexion it is thrown by superfluous egress, and the patient is cured with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then when the patient is lying on his back on his neck, and place with the tendon three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypocondres, the honor perve the decubit of man.
And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery mot.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the thickness of the chain, and there be no more adjusted; and if the patient standing on his feet of him; and if it is not standing, then be lying, the one who has already extended his thighs, and elevate his arms.
And to you it is possible to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery cutellar, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that too much you do not process in the cauterization, and be adhered the thickness of the whole chain so that it be adhered all the body and reach into the bowels, for the chain here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there comes an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient suffers heaviness and pain is sharpened.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is sharpened great and sometimes that already fatigued the doctors the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is lying on his back; and place the location of the abscess with the tendon; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which has preceded in the other page. And cauterize with that i cautery until the whole chain be cauterized, until it reaches the ciph, until it be healed.
And then cure that with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not cover that of this form of cautery use only that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; but this with experience sometimes be dared on this operation, but however leave that of us, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They say the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristolochia to pleurisy fire according to this manner to be made, and it is that you take of the roots of aristolochia long dry a root pun long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries, I have guided, one slightly leaning towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is leaning between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, leaning slightly towards the back; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the sides; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not put your hand on the cautery, but rather in the manifest of the code in work.
And already said some ancients that some of the men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it be cured, thus as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it happens so quickly in the place of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are straightforward, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not put your hand on the cautery; and the patient be raised upon his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticents, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight line of the spleen the one that reaches the lying of the left patient.
And be your elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then, between the two verticents, ignite, in that entrance where you penetrate the code from the other side.
And then, extract the cautery; and therefore four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three verticents.
And then you cure the cautery as it has been left for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxx i.
Of cauterization of hydropic.
Cauterize not cats in hydropic but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the spirit of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets brac for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with that which covers so that two understandings be added to it, and it be festively treated with assistant healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is clavilh according to the shape of which is used precedent, and that with which the back is cauterized is olivar according to what is precedent in its shape.
Chapter .xxx ii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the things.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropic and are filled with clear water, cover that cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the clear water is retained.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two things two cauteries, and in each thing be made cautery with the extremity of the cautery cutellar. And be the cautery according to the length of the thing: and one below and the other below the middle of the thing; and on each thing two cauteries.
And leave the plague open ses cure for a long time so that some water is drained from it.
And therefore take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is affected by cold and humidity within which the virtues, the digestive and retentive, which are in the stomach and bowels, are weakened, it is cured by these methods of cure and not by other means, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit the virtue, then cauterize with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery of the chisel; and with cautery on the belt over the large intestine, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize on the intestines and bowels, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure of benefit of which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When old hemorrhoids are in nature, or one of thick humors cold or of corrupted humors, and are cured by what we have said in the division and not by other means of cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spongy of the small and small triangular spine, and with a cautery above the navel, falling by two digits.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him is cold and his food is undigested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with a cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a chisel cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of the aethyl near the abscess of them.
When you abscess aethyl, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that abscessed aethyl, and last your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the aethyls are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then take care of those with what you confer to them of the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the intestine, it is more beneficial in benefit.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature in the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, he is healed with cautery.
Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature, and it is old, corroded, and of corrupted humors, and then that which is most worthy to cover it is that you probe it with a subtle cautery, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe enters.
And iterate over that cautery within until those corrupted parts are burned once, twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the bowel, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it or corrupted, or that this comes from those causes of which remembrance will come in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it is necessary to have pain from cold or from thick wind, and therefore the body of the patient is inflamed, then you should cauterize on the boils with a cautery over each boil with a chisel cautery of which I have previously mentioned the remembrance.
And firmly cauterize with the second one a little, so that there will come three linear cauteries, and then they are more beneficial in benefit.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there occurs in the bladder weakness and softening from cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize on the part below over the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the navel, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the knots of the pulse; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And cauterize the clavilh according to what is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the cauterization of the  mayra.
When there comes in the womb,  moisture and corruption, and therefore pregnancy is forbidden, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the  provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the  movement of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery over the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and be the cautery clavilh.
Chapter XL.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are poured into the part of the hip, and are made causes of the swelling of its place, and a sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in it where it is raised.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient over the part of the hip of it with a cautery in a circle resembling, as much as you will have felt with the finger in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And be the cautery of which preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And be made the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole bone; and take care of it that it be healed.
Chapter XLI.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the hip, and it is caused by it, cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, then it is necessary that you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize it over the part of the hip of it with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery should be on the middle of the top of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is, a circle containing and burning the thickness of the whole bone.
And this is the manner of cauterizing sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and is not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh over the place where you feel the pain; and with one cautery on the  bone for four fingers a little below the  cylindrical part.
And if the cautery is a knife, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended into the place near the toes, then cauterize it here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is necessary of that.
And if the patient feels pain below the  thigh in the leg, then cauterize it here with a knife cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that for that to you is upon the patient no harm or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the bone and ended in the cauterization, and the foot inflamed until the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted the whole foot. And then a very strong solution of the belly, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And some wise men say in the cauterization of the hip, the cautery of which this is the manner: make it resembling a circle of iron of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from that circle be another third; and be the spaces the which is between them the quantity of the pulse of the hand; and be those circles opened of two parts; and be the length of those cais a finger or two fingers, and make in those marks of iron decently adorned in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with butter and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the terror of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
May the cauteries to those who suffer them, and find a place for it.
May cauteries with medicinal ointments be that you make two circles having a hole pierced in which they put the gauge of the iron door; let the length of the sides in the breadth of them be two nuts or whatever those are.
And if the spaces which are between some the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and be open below and above, and be that they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand on the area of the back; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the burning of it — for that biting is like fire — until the bite ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the boiling water from the whole back with sweet water.
And then leave that for three days and place over that butter until the blackness of the burning is gone, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it a pus; this is called in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make to it a statue in it that contains water as it is made in the back equally.
And this is the manner of boiling water, and you already have written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of lime in the extinct of both a part one, and three them and place them in a new bowl of which the lower part be pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
And place below the bottom of the bowl another bowl inverted, and pour over that alkali and lime alive of sweet water which covers them by a finger, and as you compress those with your hand by good compression, and leave the bowl that descends from it water sharp in the lower part to the inverted bowl.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live lime and another renewed alkali, for that one at that time is of strong force sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation makes of fire.
And so of the medicines some with which it is cauterized much, as tezizic and honey anacrat and lime with sabon so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of back and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much well to be of that, and says that no has need of other cure, and that is healed by one time as he recounts, for strong leu that interweaving in bath and he already sees of that.
And it is that it be taken of certain rag green, and if it is not found green, it be taken fig leaf recent; and much be it trissad with a little of gray and it be placed on the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it be tied.
And it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the burning.
And then put that in bath and then when the body of it be red, introduce that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with a goat's flen the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits him very well; and let the cautery be with it according to this manner: let wool be taken and be soaked in old oil, and let it be placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take a dry goat's flen and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it be extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the sensation of the bite reaches into the back and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of two.
Sometimes pain is in the two for many causes, such as for blows or for percussion or for superfluous evacuation, and for causes to those similar, for infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize only this particular type which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Then, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar ones, which are made on the two sides of the one where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, because you have to cauterize each line with a cautery, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial chisel cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of inflammation.
Often this disease happens to young children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that they stumble over their structure in the leg and have elevation and movement.
And atrophy in the last vertebra of the lower back and of its nodes that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is circular according to this form: that presses the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be close together.
And after the cure the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization not be administered in inflammation that is made by spasm of a nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, as gout caused by cold is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not removed, then the pains are removed with cautery.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the tendons or to the other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that on each tendon with three or four cauteries of the entire part with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery before, be only around the outline of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the tendon of the lower back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the muscles only, and it is called sciatica, then prick in the circuit of the fossae thus as it revolves, prick in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the fossae on each node and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains rise to certain joints in the shoulders or to the muscles, then cauterize the certain parts of the joints.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done good regimen and the evacuation is done with this cautery, it will be healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture happens in the groin and the intestines are protruding in front of the hernia, and this begins to protrude, then it is necessary that you order the patient to leave their food for the day and that they use lenient causes so that the wound descends from their belly.
And then hold the patient between your hands over their back, and command him to keep his leg straight until the hernia is thrown or the intestines appear.
And then return that with your hands and feel with your fingers the rupture over the bones of the pelvis with a sign the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
until it be very hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand with the cautery standing straight, and hold that until with it you can feel the bones of the pelvis into the middle of the groin; and repeat with that another time if with that you have not succeeded in the first attempt into the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that it does not come to death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bone, do not compromise your operation.
And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And after carefully care for the cauterized area for three days until the scar of the fire is healed.
And after care for that with the other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the plague are sealed.
And know that you should pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his cure, which the lines his belly, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
And after, when he wants to stand up, after forty days, then administer him decent food, and keep that for another forty days.
And be moderate in work and in the repletion of food and drink, and of voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you should say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is that which is extracted from the codena as if it were the third part of it; and after care for that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones say that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tenta:
And it is placed a line that goes by the latitude in the broadest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not help in the cure with medicines, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and its smallness, and its virtue and weakness, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for by custom of those pains it is that they are pointed of member to that member which approaches to it, so that know that you should cauterize those until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times is cauterized by great benefit, and especially if it is the kind of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with what we have said in the division and do not desist, nor is it, and fear over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of it and the whole complexion of it, then cauterize that over the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second further down from it, and the front to the end of the hair; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little while before it imprints on the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs be displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors be alleviated from it; and cauterize over the flesh according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize that with those cauteries the ones which we have said in the head; and with a cautery over the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries over two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the vertebrae near the hip, and one over the ribs, and with two over the knees, and one over each knee, and with two over the elbows, and with two over the muscles, and with two over the tendons of their feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and over each heel of their feet, and over the hollows of their arms.
And guard yourself from the nerves which are on the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the palate and with another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that as much as you adjust cauteries, so much is it more beneficial and more conferent; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as if they have their own, because for that the body of it is already stupefied.
And know that the cauteries should be great or few according to the members and the joints according to what is preceded by the species of the tools.
And then carefully apply the cautery to the surface with a mixture of flour, honey, and the other remedy while it is healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When any limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed limb with a cautery according to what merits the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the depth of the bone a little. And then carefully apply that with an ointment while it is healing.
And sometimes, certain stupors are cauterized which extend to the arms and legs, and to the vertebrae of the lower back and the spaces of the nerves which supply that limb, and the stupor is removed.
But do not presume to do this except for one who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the egress of the nerves throughout the entire body.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, pricking it a little, according to the quantity of the depth of the bone, until the whiteness and color of it are removed, and the color of it is changed.
And then carefully apply that with a mixture of flour, lentils, and rose oil, and with arnica leaves, and either pigeon's blood or round robin's blood, from each one a part, and all mixed together, and then apply a linen cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of crabs.
When a cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
And some wise men say that it should be cauterized with the pointed cautery in the middle place; but to me this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more proper that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a moving cautery.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of abscesses.
When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is because of the superfluity that causes it, or because of the patient's age, who is old or decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with a small, moving cautery, and then leave it so that it will hasten in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery, the shape of which is this: and pause that in the middle place of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery in that place that is furthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then carefully apply that until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of corrodents.
A corrodent is a corruption that walks in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a place that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize that from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized places a compress with oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then carefully apply that with ointments that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is raw in the corrupted places.
And a corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in the place of cautery. But nevertheless, cauterization with fire is of more gentle help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of warts and other similar things.
Many times there is a malady on the lower parts of the foot called a wart, and it is a rough, protruding cause, which makes the foot lame; and cauterization in those is done in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery concave in the shape of a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the wart from all sides, and is of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited one over the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And let him rest for three days before he begins to throw up. And apply a poultice made with wild herbs crushed with salt to that, and leave the poultice on it for a night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And treat the area with a gargle of generative meat until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization to those with water, and take a small quantity of lead or iron or vulture's bone, and place it on the boil; and then pour a little water into the cavity of the tool, and hold your hand, and you revolve that with the pressure of your hand, and press the edge of the tool into the root of the boil, and it will draw the water into the root of the boil; and wait for the patient a little while for the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove it, because the boil with its roots will be eradicated.
And so do this to those and the other until you come upon all of them on their body.
And treat those pus that the roots of the boils are eradicated with this water that the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to heat in the nerve or fever of heat, or for some similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with an olive cautery.
And the tremor of him will be rested and hastened the health of the feverish illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white spots accidents on the body.
When on the body are spots white, and are pustules split that are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, that it be cauterized over the top of the fistula with a subtle cautery with twigs of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and if they are not believed, and the superfluity is ruptured, then those, and it heals from those.
But however, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of flux of blood accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a flux of artery that is incised, the plague which must be forced, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you must tightly grasp with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place over it your finger, stretching that many times until it stops the flux of blood from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number many, and exhale over them while they are burning.
And take from those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is ruptured, over that vein, quickly, as you have removed your finger, and bring the cautery until it is abcised and constricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery tightly from the cauteries that in the fire are prepared, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is constricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another malice.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to constrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or with cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are burned well and the blood is constricted, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament for strong structure, or that they be placed upon him medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be tightened with a cushion with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent constriction of him with a ligament and with structure with cloths or by position of burning causes and similar, do not confer otherwise than briefly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more cossire in which he has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incision and perforation and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and of their kinds.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which it is convenient to use a cautery with fire and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those with the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters of the hierarchy of the head within the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who wants to know this may be satisfied, about what he has asked.
And before that I begin this, know, my son, that in this chapter it is for terror what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that, know that great caution must be exercised, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times the evacuation of blood is necessary, which is the life of man; the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the fistula or purification of the poultice or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their kinds. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the hands of them, the death.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall this which is said, because sometimes it happens that you handle men with many kinds of illnesses. And of those there are some who will go away with their illness and it is lighter for them the death, and thus by the vehemence of what he finds of his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his trust and saying, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, know that you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom is this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause about this unless with certain knowledge which verifies this, and to which by succession, praiseworthy success.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them to which is health converted, because in that is to you an aid on the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire in you his understanding and no obstacle to your direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters as preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated what you ask of this and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness many times happens to children after childbirth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, its vitality.
And sometimes it happens because of a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death came, and thus it is to me the work left undone in those.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not stand upon himself because of the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased until fire died.
And this humidity is either added between the bone and the bone, or it is added after the bone upon the skull.
Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is few, then you must do in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure as two nights until the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is greater, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is after the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand at the parts of the head and it is not that to you hidden. Know that you must do in the middle place of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision extract all the humidity; and after strengthen the fissures with cloths and cotton; and after embroca that with wine and oil until the fifth day, and after untie the bandage and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you consider honor to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where appears the abscess and the repletion of the water, and do it according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and it happens that it flows blood and dies the patient because of that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the hands or feet, and this is old and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the following cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those that the patient raises their head, and then press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider where the vein is; and the places of each on the places which are near the ears, and so they are hidden, except in some men.
And then pierce over the artery with a tent, and then incise each one with the spatula of each sharp part with incision reaching into the bone, and this by the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions at the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is two fingers adjusted, for when any vein is incised, the blood is emitted with a pulsatile exit, which jumps out by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and then pierce with a tent, and end inside the bone.
And this that you must get out of the blood is a quantity of one ounce, and very little less or more, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the plaque, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the head, then incise this so that it does not become an abscess caut.
And then strengthen the plaque with cotton and with bandages of cloth, and then cure this with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain  ancient migraine or catarrh occurs, due to humidity of the  agricola and the quality in the lacerations of the temples, or a very vehement ancient sore and similar to those, and it is medicated with the ways of cure of medicine and this does not respond, then we have resorted in these ailments to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hair which are in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few men by the vehemence of the flesh.
And if to you it is hidden, then the neck of the patient be tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the bone with that with facility until you reach the artery; and then get into it and extract that at the sovereign parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the oncii, and then incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and it will not have a flow of blood, because if they are not incised it will not raise the blood at all.
And then evacuate of the blood of one ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong cord or with long ropes, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the plaque and it will become a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligatures; and do this at that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cauterizer inside the bone with a cauterizer cutler until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that same work.
And it is a better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover after the extraction of the arteries that you have placed the area of the wound, and be laid upon it poultices decently made, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with hot water until it is healed.
And if while you work another vein becomes a flow of blood from the artery, then you must take care to restrain that blood, either with cauterization, or that you fill the area of the wound, and tighten your hand until it is restrained the blood. And if any cause of those is not to you present, then pause your finger on the area until the blood is congealed, and pour the area with water of very cold heat until the sharpness rests, and tighten according to what you must.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have felt the two places with the probe, and after pausing for a while, ignite it, until it reaches the bone and incisions the vein in two places, so that it be elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated altogether with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is also. But however, if it is less sharpness than two handles is better, because if it is sharp with two handles it approaches each burn, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those [cauteries] there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is slightly cut away.
And this work is better in all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Of the cure of the body of acute and acid humors of the heels.
When the humors are acid, and the body of those veins which are upon the test of the head of the foot, and does not comfort in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in his forehead a walk as if it were a walk of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so much that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed agro in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead, and then incisions in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lachrymal which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself of the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if to you a piece of sponge dressed or cloths dried very much with which you dry the blood.
And then put between the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is of the parting of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the ciphrac which is upon the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then stratz in this spatula and put into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp deves the flesh annexed deves the flesh, and the side of it lean within the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs from the blood a quantity equal, squeeze the places of the pieces of the congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure a poultice of old cot, and pause upon those poultices steeped in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and watch that it does not become an abscess caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of boiled water or thyme, and then cure that with an enguent bazilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of lagremas by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts of the inside of the head.
When to some comes catartz sharp and continuing, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the forehead of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from many veins of the inside parts proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then incisions in that a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and elongate your hand from the lachrymal of the temples which are bad deves the mastication), until it be the bone uncovered.
Exsicca all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then repleys between the two lips of the fissure with old cot or with linen rags. And then stretch above with poultices steeped in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess caut.
And when you untie this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound where it begins to grow flesh, and then take care of it with an exsiccative regimen that makes the flesh grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and make a poultice of it and administer it in these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catz in the ears.
Every cause that catz in the ears is one of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and lead, or it is of a plant, such as celery or beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and sour wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when stone catz in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and puts the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient to snort with a condition, and plug their nostrils to prevent the occurrence of snorting. And then put in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, because many times it is thrown out with these causes.
And if it is not thrown out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called a gesti epicicarios subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is thrown out with the gesti, well is; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not thrown out by this, then make a canula of brass and introduce the extremity of the canula into the tract of the ear and close around the canula with wax and softened oil so that it be not open except the canula. And then extract with your wind with a strong attraction, as many times as with the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not thrown out in this manner, then take some halka lit or of a vetch apparelled with which the birds are taken a small quantity, and put that in the extremity of a ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot. And then introduce that into the tract of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not thrown out with all the causes that we have recounted, then you should try to cut that before it becomes an abscess or a spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cesser between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear, so that the gray of it in the place well pressed of it. And let the fissure be of a lunar figure until it reaches the stone, and, the stone being caught, hold that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure that while it is healing.
And if the cause catz in the ear is one of the greases that grow and swell, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your treatment, then you take a subtle spatum according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that grease which is catz in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and prop extract it with the oncis or with a subtle gesti, or with an incision as we have said, because the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover that the patient uses of snorting with a condition at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is thrown out, well is; and if not, then take many small stones and leons according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient introduces one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is thrown out.
Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is thrown out. And already the water is thrown out in this way that you take paper or of gonc, and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned the most of it.
And prop put another gonc and do this so many times until all the water is thrown out, and straz that with a canula as it is said of the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of beast intrant into that ear, if it is a small thing, as it is like it, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is of a great thing which causes to appear at the sight of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is pus lighter of all the other causes that catz in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms engendered in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you must watch the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if there is here any cause of the worms, then extract that with a tool or with subtle instruments, but if there is no appearance of any cause, then take a tube that is narrow and wide at the top of which this is the form: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can suffer; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey in this way, then you plug and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
And this is the effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the top, with a small hole, and flat at the top.
And therefore it is as if they were pushing it into the cavity of the tube of which here is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it at the end of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the ray with cotton on top and press with your hand that with moderate compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear should already be scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, because the medicines of the ear do not suffer that.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of ear opacities.
Sometimes, some children are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this sometimes happens to some men, opacity in the flesh of the ear by plague or by flesh that is nothing in that; and this opacity sometimes is made in the preau of the ear canal which does not allow the vision, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the preau of it, which does not allow vision, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that in which you can see, then you must place the ear of the patient in the sunlight and watch it. And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it in which the latitude is small, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with subtle instruments and cut that with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opacity is in the preau of the ear, then take a subtle ray long and scald that with fire a little, and then put that into the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt opacity with what the patient feels with facility, by the gravity of the ear, force the oppression of it with facility; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put that in water and pulverize it over it, following the advice of three; and if you see the ear already be festered, then you must extract the pus and replace it with another which you wrap in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the abscess has yielded; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there happens a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use of the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cure of atheroma which happens to the eyelids.
Atheroma which happens to the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is moist, sometimes is dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with instruments, and you incise them with a spatula of their roots, and then place on the places according to the advice of three.
But if pain with a flow of blood appears, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is after the incisions and many times returning when there is some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Cure of a great swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many ailments arise in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause a swelling that is assembled to great strength and hardness, and by its greatness it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you consider this if the swelling is proceeding in it, that is apart from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make a cut on that with a fissure through the width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it escapes, and then suspend that with an onion and cut that off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with suture; and care for that while it is healed.
And if it is small, to you it will not come to harm for that because the ointment of it restores that and encases it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, then you dissect the inner parts, then you raise the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an onion, another that you do not dig from the incision, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then you do not notice in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the eyes with salt water; and cure the place with water that encases while it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure of the axcirnah in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath is gray which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly in children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accidies their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun for that because tears are gathered to those.
And because of this, those who do it rub on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, those which have already covered inflammation, and imminent appearance of a cataract is in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the cataract within those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places their head in your lap, and then places a cloth on them and makes a poultice, and makes of it a circle according to the quantity which contains cataract from all parts, and then places that on that and presses with your fingers from all sides so that it be added cataract in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incisive with a fissure through the width, and the fissure not be larger than the fissure that is made in a flenbotomy.
But in the pressing cover that you make the incision all while you arrive at cataract, because in the most auspicious processes cataract by fissure according to the form of white grayness.
Therefore, extract that with cloths those which you have enveloped between your fingers to the outer parts and revolve between your right and left hand while it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not arrive at the eye and you scrape that.
But if you do not appear cataract at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease while it processes cataract; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and honey and place them on the place and strengthen those with powders.
And if some that grind salt and place that in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remade of that humidity.
And then cure that while it is healed.
But if it happens in the place an abscess caut, then cure that with poultices cedatils while it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are natural and are aged by the adjustment below the hairs, then those annoy the eye and make become manners of illnesses as such as copious tears and softening of eyelids and film while that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye, and cure is made in four manners: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to that which was said before in the chapter of cautery; or it is made atactini by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I say.
And therefore cover that you place the head of the patient in your lap; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, well is; and if not, introduce a needle into that in which it is faithful of the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with faith below, and that be — near the margin of the eyelid in which there are the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the parts below with the eyelid, and convert that with the ray.
And then make in the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with a spatula incisive of the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread and place below the eyelid small powders of cot or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with a tent, and be as such as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because some of those who are indigenous that it should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then bring the spatula over the two lines that you have made, and begin from the greater lacrimal into the lesser lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as if it were the thickness of the king.
And then put the ounce in one of the two angles of the wound, and then excoriate the whole of it, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a thread or a fine wool, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what superfluities of the threads over the two eyebrows with some causes envisaged, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then take care of it.
And if you want, leave the wound to its suture, and take care of it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the wound and the adhesion of it; but suture is better. And therefore, I say this as the ancients did to tax.
But however, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another way in taxmir, and it is that the figure on the eyelid is as if it were a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate and congregated hooks according to this form:
But if it is not possible, have the hooks, and this is not equal, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the greater lacrimal, and the other thread near the lesser lacrimal, and adjust between the said threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole wound on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess happens from your incision or your fissure, drain that abscess with a cerot and similar, and with gauze.
And some times it happens that the eyelid that its hairs be converted, then it is necessary that you use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To tax with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is detailed according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety over what superflues of the eyelid of the well, and constrict the canes of each part with strong stricture, and leave it for some days, because the wound by the stricture will die and be denied and will be able to enter while it itself falls.
But if it is late, then break it with the pliers, and then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidated, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of stinging hairs in the well with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the wells, then the operation in it is that you take a fine needle and put in it a fine thread of cedar and lead, and then you adjust the extremities of it and nuts in a very subtle way. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another fine thread below it in brief, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then put the patient his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work may be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair adjusted which has needed to be engineered, and make that penetrate into the eyelid carefully until you extract that from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair down and introduce that into the alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that so that the hair may be coated with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the alixalati is thrown and the hair is not thrown, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until it is thrown alixalati from the top.
And see that with the vision of the well, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan something and close the well, and leave the closings for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and grows upon that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you leave it inside so that it is elongated a little space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the eyelid above.
When it comes in the eye, and is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, or on the right or left side, by bad consolidation of plague or section or cautery, and it is called leporine, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or sections or cautery, or by resemblance to their malcuratz.
The manner of the operation in it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and tie those together until they are healed.
And do not use of cure of it of the causes which dry it, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than any time you have not had.
Use in that of causes that soften it as is fennel, and embroiled with the water in which they are cooked altea and seeds of it, or enguent dyaquilon, the which be liquefied with some of the oils, and submergeys in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but any rectification of cataract which does not return the form of the place according to what you had before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the eyelid below.
This cataract which is made in the eyelid below, which is truly called cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plague or by scissura or by cautery or by others resemblances.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal right, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and stitch that with the needle, and insciseys with spatula ample. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to what it should, well is; and if not, take the ray and put that in the wounded figure, and with that converts the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid below.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and be of their made angle until when they meet be made figure of theirs.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then place the flesh that for the quantity that is the edge of it sharp below of it, that which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it be healed.
And if cataract should come from fissure or suture or cautery, then it is that you make with fissure flat on the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that it runs in it operation, according to what is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepares engine in any manner which is possible to it until it makes return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to what it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When it accides this consolidation to many men in such a way that it is solidated the eyelid more above with the album of the eye, and it is prohibited of the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is that you entermetas the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate in it that, or extend that with the unci.
And then you insciseys the adhesion with spatula subtle, the which not be with sharpness of the incisions, having obtuse a little for so that the patient not be inquietated of the operation, and remove the spatula that does not lead the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision that excoriate that adhesion with facility until it be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and put on the eye wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidating causes until it be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that a nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and it is like a hard and subtle sheepskin; or it is non-nervous, like white congealed moisture, which when you touch it, it is forced to take with it, it is cut off and the blood does not go into it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, which goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient put his head in the low seat, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with a little blood and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and introduce into it a piece of horse, or cow, or sheep, or similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and scrape with the skin the side of the nail which sees the pupil. And thus you follow it with the skin until the back of it.
And then you incision the remaining in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the lacrimal natural so that by incision of it does not become continuous flow of tears.
And some times the nail with the sole blood extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a spatula lion of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that it becomes broken in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision put in the eye a little bit of salt crushed or a bit of  chief made of  sinar, and leave it in for the other day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put into it the blood, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incision it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula of sharp freul according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rareified and confused and put in that root, then distill of your hour in the eye of chief made of siniar or with chief rog or with salt crushed, and opilate the eye for the other day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess may be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great harm, be suspended with blood; and incision it from that one part, and do not ultimate the incision so that it does not incision continuous flow of tears.
And then distill in the lacrimal chief rog and made of siniar until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of alguezardonic and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some is born red flesh, and it is over-placed until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forcefully compresses the eyelids to the sides and is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient put his head in the low seat; and then opens the eyes of that and collect all that flesh with convenient blood to water, and take water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incision the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself of the eye that you do not damage it with your operation.
And be your incision with the one that incisions those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which it is collected ascebel according to that will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as is completed your incision and is removed all that flesh, then fill the eye with salt crushed, or distill in it powder rog and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye outside a cloth with album of hen until it is assured of abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of alguezardonic and is lordly blood caut, and you fear abscess caut, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that gives that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye freul by natural way or by accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter xviii.
Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes out of the wounds which are covered on the wound and prohibit the clothing from its operation, and the wound heals in length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment than pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in the towel, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or with two according to your prudence; and that bandage of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one body according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, until those veins are re-moved from the wound and are rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the wound with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the afternoon before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you will have completed, then you distill in the wound chief green or red so that with its sharpness corrodes that which is removed from the pus.
But if that is not possible to you collect everything in that hour, and then you plaster all with that which yields the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and that it is secured of the abscess caut.
And then iterate over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter xix.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arizati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it but that you make over the abscess you see the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is discovered the bone.
And therefore as it is discovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called of sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap rounded as it is to grasp the which is made pointed by the point of a file or by the point of a scalpel subtly (as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And that be done several times, and then restore the place with exsiccative and styptic causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for forty days, and it is not renewed and is not suppurated and does not happen in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is not engendered in it but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you discover of the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and as it is discovered the bone, then you take a tribo according to this form:
Let the half of it iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be prime attenuated at the extremity as it sometimes is so.
And then pause that on the bone, and it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little of the wound, and then revolve your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as it finds air passing through it when you move your hand.
Therefore then restore the place with styptic and exsiccant medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore as the flesh grows and the place is hardened, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter on the patient.
Chapter xx.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the wound.
When the wound eminates with its totality and does not happen in the covering harmful or diminution, then cover that you relax the patient, and then you follow it, and then you pause windy in the neck its scarification and suck for good suction; and then pause over the wound liniment which is made of atramentum and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the wound with soft powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of the lions soft, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those soft.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need. And then strengthen over those with hard cloth with strong structure; and iterate the leeches with suction its scarification; and then remove the leeches and leave the wound straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then cover that it be very tight.
And then remove the ligament at the day and the night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the stricture and the leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of a man is formed by this, and if you want to cut this, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and then put the other needle, which has a double thread, on the side of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circle of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then extract the needle and place it over the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, add a whole piece in a circle of cloth around the wound, adjusting the prominent eminence, and then perforate it with a fine spatula that comes to the tip of the wound, and let the albuginea humidity flow, and descend the wound and enter shortly.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This disease that is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
But the way of acting in it is that you make the patient lie on a prepared and straight saddle, and then take his head in your hands of two parts and move it so that you see the swelling coming to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent to the swelling with water that we have said is not prepared, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a fine spatula and pierce it into that on the panniculus, cutting a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the empty place), until the swelling is expelled.
Therefore, when it is expelled, then you distill into the wound water boiled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water of the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which one it is convenient to perforate with a serum, declaring, then this according to the health.
Then, you must make the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and tie his wound tightly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound in which is the water is the left; or on your right hand, if the wound is the right.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand on it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already arrived at the void cause.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the tip be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends so quickly, then wet the patient's wound with water over which he has his sight immediately, and almond in his wound.
And then rest for a while; therefore if the water has descended, then you put that other one back down as long as the almond is not thrown.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound carefully; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
But not in those who are of our time, place on that comi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound due to its hardness — because it is some of the men whose wound is very hard — then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the shape:
And therefore pierce with that that conjuncture, and do not end your hand in the track, and it is not if you do not make a way for the almond to the subtle place.
And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete the work, prepare the patient for sleep in a quiet, dark room where they lie on their back, and forbid all movement.
And keep him in nature so that his nature is purified, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
And then unbind him in that dark room and prohibit the cold air, and make him see some causes, and then return the binding on the seventh day.
And do not let him do this at the hour of cures or soon after the infusion. You must have him do this so that the water flows lightly through the great and vehement of regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the wound before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that comes from the abscess.
Then you close the eyes of him and place your hand on the face of him through which the movement of him is regulated, leaving him for several days, him existing in the dark room.
And then he is taken out of that room gradually and converses about his causes.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple of vision is not excused some times, and then you shall be bold about the operation.
And we have arrived at some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen in our land anyone who had perfect water, nor is water mentioned in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it is above those who ignore those:
And they are made of copper or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as such is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse flesh growths of which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of moth weight, or a polyp weight; and this ailment is called polyp because of the resemblance to that weight represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, lapped, of brown color; and of it is that flesh lion not of brown color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must have the patient be seated between your hands and placed in the sun, and hue the nostrils of him, and pick your onci in those flesh. And then extract that to the outer parts, and then incise the water that you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh is gone; if any cause of it remains, of which the abscision is possible, then you root that water with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing of it remains. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him what you must; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cauterize it until it is abscindit blood and all the cavities are gone.
And then be placed in the nose after the incision vi agre and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as you must, then you know that from it is flesh nothing in the pus sobiras bones of the nose to which the abscision has not reached.
Therefore then you must introduce a thread of it into which there is some thickness, and use in it moth nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is to it possible.
And as that will have done, that it will throw its odor into the canals of the nose, and be spit on the throat, because troops of times the semblance to this action do the children at the schools, and is lighter cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the nuts that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
But if you are in need of a cure that requires, use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument to capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp, as such as a small conch, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed canula like a tube, and the tube of the instrument to be used for purging should be flat, uncovered; to which have a handle at the back of it, with which you hold it when you heat oil or water in it that you wish from the suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the nails in the extremities of the nose.
Many times the nail in the extremities of the nose is seen, and it is magnified and mentioned in some days within which it is not seen.
And for that, you must insist on that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it. And then place on the area a cautery or medicine that is burning, the one which is in place of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron, for it is a dangerous abscess; for many times that one who incides this abscess, should suffer great malice from the one who had it.
And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of dark color, and sometimes that incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incisions that without fear, and cure the area with water that is required and constrict within which it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of suturing the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarities.
Know that when accidents happen dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little confidence is given in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it is necessary to have some cause of those, that you consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excoriate each part of its apparent tendon until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those pulverize blood of dragon and incense, and place over the powder a piece of diaphana plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and change that plaster and leave that until the filaments are by themselves separated, and then cure with an enguent until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the dissolution of continuity with thread as you have been taught.
Chapter XXVII.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts between.
Many times it is necessary for many men in the parts between their lips some abscesses hard similar to fat of ears, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fends each one of those hardnesses from all parts, and then the abscess incision fill the place with incense blood until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with vinegar and be cured the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly often there are on the gums flesh adjusted the which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with tongs or that you have that with the forceps and incision that you must cut its root, and let the blood run or the blood.
And then place on the area incense blood or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incision that secondarily, and cauterize that, for then the cauterization will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts between and of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some times are of black and are made yellow or green until the gum sees through it corruption and are made the teeth jagged.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your lap, and ratz the teeth in which appear those roughnesses and causes similar to sand until of them no cause remains, and this do of the blackness and of the yellowness and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore if it is last that which is in those of the beginning of the root, good is; and if not, then you iterate the root over those on the other day and on the second and on the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of different types of drills and of various figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And because the razors have which the tooth is razored from the root is another from the razor which is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare those which you will see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Eradication of Teeth.
Take care that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and take your time in the entire eradication of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the vigor of it when it is eradicated, for it is substance sublimated within that the excuse in the eradication of it.
But take care when the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, that you firmly must certify which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and makes it seem as though it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and aching tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must be certified which is the aching tooth, and that you know well, then you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums of all parts, and then you must pull that out with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you conquer it.
And then, in order to have a good hold, use strong pincers or a strong hold, and place the head of the patient between your teeth that you have well, so that it does not harm, and then pull the tooth according to straightness in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one to the tooth from all parts with facility and exert the removal of it in such a way that it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must take a piece of cloth and wrap that around the broken part with the extremity of a fine ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with the pliers.
And you must work skillfully with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard well your strength that you do not break it and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that it is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity over the eradication of them, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they make come upon the men ailments great ones which are more difficult to be broken, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw as in many times we have testified.
And after the eradication of it, the mouth should be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if it should flow blood for this, as many times it should, then sprinkle some quantity of zegi and asperge it upon the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and the subtle pliers with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning should be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you must work with them.
And they should be as times of thick handle so that when you tighten them with those they are not bent, they should be short extremities.
And they should be made of Indian iron, carefully made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those there should be teeth of which some interlock in others and tighten by strong constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are the shape of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so it is called a "spoon", and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Eradication of Teeth and the Extraction of the Bones of the Jaw Broken.
When you must eradicate the tooth which is broken and there remains some cause, then you must place upon the place a poultice with border for a day or for two until the place is softened; and then with some pliers or forceps the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or "spoon", the form of the forceps:
The extremities of them should be made of flint as if it were a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your instrument with these forceps or pliers, then you must dig upon the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name "atal", so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And it should be of short extremity thick one small, and it should not be bent so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the root is extracted, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and of thinner extremity.
And already you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form near the following: And other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; for the scraping is done with this instrument which is assembled like a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular short or curved extremity, which is some thickness, and is not embedded so that it is not twisted.
And other things that the instruments of the teeth are moving and similar to the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what the operation means to him and the diverse ailments; for they are of the ailments to which the ancients did not say nor place proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is twisted, or if it is possible, then it is cured over that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And be in it some thickness little by little, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to that.
But if in the bone is a small hole, then seize that of that hole and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, for those the form is lacking, and mostly when it happens to women, and mostly to the venerable old ones; therefore, since you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then root that; but that it is not attached to another tooth, then you incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron of a sharp moving extremity.
And be your incision with which you incise it in several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not damaged by other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And be all of Indian iron the margin and very well; and be of small moving points as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in several days with facility, so that no other tooth be damaged and broken. And then line that at the end, and seize that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which one part is twisted and licks the tongue, then when you file it until the projection of that fraction is stayed and smoothed, and be filled so that the tongue does not lick it nor the word is broken.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which he manages, and you have cured it with styptic medicines, and it has not been of any use your cure, then because it does not break, it is made in those that are strengthened with gold wire and not with silver, because silver becomes green and soon, but gold never changes.
And be the wire in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the straight is that you take the wire and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you curve it with two tortuosities of the wire between two damaged ones, or if it is one or several, until it reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the tightening into the part of which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And be your tightening with which you strengthen the wire the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then incise the superfluous extremities of the wire with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it that tight like a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen it or those with another wire in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as sometimes these are tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the fall of each one, and they are recut as we have recounted, and that they are damaged.
And this is done only by a good artificer and wise.
And sometimes it is adapted some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made as such as the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and happens by plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevate his tongue, and then incise that ligament nerve according to the latitude so that the tongue is loosened from its recess.
But if in that there is some hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you throw a point and cut it along the latitude as long as you have incised the ligament and the knotting is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the skin of the flesh and that you cut here the artery and blood comes.
And then wash the traces of the incision with water or with wine or with cold water; and then place under the tongue; so is the method which holds the patient of the tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated another time.
But if blood flows, place on the location vitriol crushed; but if the blood comes, then cauterize the location with a cauterizing iron which convenes to this. And then this cure with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess happens on the tongue resembling a small lump which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified as long as the mouth is open.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient seeing in front of the sun and considers the abscess.
And if you see it of a dark color or of a black, hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that because it is a cancer.
And if it is inclined to white, in which there is humidity, then you put the point in it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place crushed vitriol above it, so that it is restrained the blood.
And then return to your work until you had treated it with compliment of it, until it is washed with wine and salt; and cure this with the other cure to water until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of abscesses of the ears and of that which is nothing in the throat and of the other abscesses.
When in the throat there is a swelling, so are the glands which are assembled swollen, which happen outwards and are called abscesses of the ears, which when you cure them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; abandon it until it is ripe, and then either you will draw it out, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is to be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess of it has already rested with a complete rest or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then do so that the patient stands in front of the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands presses the tongue of him with an instrument noble of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle like a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and catz upon that the tieu vezement, then take a point and place it in the amenla, and pull that to the parts outwards as much as you can. Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled to forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the right of the other, very sharp, which is of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a groove, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient guards with cold water
But if there is a flow of blood, guard with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure this until it is healed.
And sometimes there are born in the throat other abscesses other than those of the ears, and incise those according to what I have said in the incision of two grooves equally.
And I have already treated a woman of an abscess which was in the throat of her, which abscess tended to a brownish color, of little feeling, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already arrived at death if may have lasted for a day or two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had two openings through which it exited.
Therefore, I treated her fisturally and placed myself in one of the openings, and pulled out that one, and it was thrown from her a large portion, and then I incised that one from where it understood from the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed her tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
And then I abscised a large portion of it, and it was not flowing from it except a little blood. Therefore, the throat of that woman was absolutely clear, and she began to drink water, and then she ate food, therefore I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and a succession of abscesses succeeded in place of that one, which incision extended while that one was prolonged.
Therefore, I brought a needle and cauterized the throat of her, therefore as much as an addition; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to her after that.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is an abscess.
When catarr rises in the boil, and it is an abscess and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not confer your cure, and it seems many times that the abscess cauterizes already and it is gone from it and it is subtle, then cover that which you incised that which is rounded; and if it is to that length, and it is sanguine, of a brownish color or black, and it is not felt in it, then cover that the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its form, and then place the opening in the navel, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two mills.
And cover that you do not incise that but that which is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise that more, you will lead the patient's speaking.
And after the incision, use of that which has been recommended in the incision of two mills, and cure that while it is healing.
But if the patient were frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of a needle in the cauterization of it his fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with sharp water, and is that you place the head of the patient in your seat, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have said, and then take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that living cause, and place that no thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the extramitat of it concavity in which the medicine is placed as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient yawns over his latz so that saliva or mucus of the mouth of that by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that for any cause over the throat of him and that it leads that.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and express that on the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that it is blackened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cotton and envelopes that over the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton in a tube of above until the cotton adheres in that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want of the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave that as it dries and falls off after about three days or four.
And if you wished to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and after the cauterization, abstain from the circuit of the uvula with cotton dipped in border, and modify with that which is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured for the time being with embrocation, and give gargles until it is healing.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and less long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner:  Receive calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camomilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged with strong wine, and boil; and the olla be well washed with decent lut, and be in the middle of the olla a hole, on which be placed an instrument concavity of Aram according to this manner; be made of silver or Aram.
And the extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula over the pharynx, until the uvula is moved and obscured.
And then repeat this motion several times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the development of abscesses, because it would too much tighten the abscess, and in the case that you do this, you must declare the abscess of him by cautery.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then take a cane and compose on the extremity of it a hollow of wood, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the hollow of the wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Many things adhered in the throat or splinter of wood or any other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what of those appears, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because forcibly the cause annexed to the throat is thrown-up by vomit; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or prepare a piece of dry sea sponge, and tie that firmly with thread, and then the patient swallows that, because when it reaches the place in which the spines are and is extracted, then it is thrown-up. And more, take an eel and bind it with thread, and its end is placed and gently extracted; or take a porcupine and gently its spines and gently the other end.
But if they are not thrown-up with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is thicker than a ray, and in the extremity of it is a concavity which you introduce into its throat with ease.
And hold its head elevated upwards, and be careful that the touch of its bone of the throat, so that it is not forced to its body and with that which it pushes the bone or the splinter, or that the physician with his hand.
But however, that the patient that is introduced is better, for his knowledge of the place of the cause annexed and pushes it down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is thrown-up.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of bloodsucker annexed to the throat.
When the bloodsucker is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have compresses the tongue of him with the instrument which to you have we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract that with a small hook or with a subtle gesture gently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain from the patient all day of water.
And then prepare a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow from that any cause and bad the water one hour after another with his hand, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catz.
But if it is not thrown-up with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cimet or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it falls.
And it is another way of operation in the subfumigation of that, is that you take a bowl in which are burning embers and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let descend the subfumigation; and place the patient his mouth in the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not thrown-up until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker immediately falls.
And if it does not fall, then you repeat the subfumigation many times, and abstain from the patient from drinking, and eat salty and dry causes, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it is thrown-up.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: The one which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is blunt, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when compressing any cause, that does not leave it.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the speech concerning abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are special matters, of many kinds, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and incision of them by two manners, of which one is by the kind of abscesses in themselves; and by that which we understand of the humidities.
And the second manner is according to the places where they occur in the body, for the abscess occurring in the head is another from the abscess occurring in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is another from the abscess occurring in the joint; and to each of them is its own treatment by operation.
And more than abscesses there are some which ought not to be perforated but upon the maturation of the sania in those or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses which ought to be lanced when they are ripe, and not upon the completion of them, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess occurs near a joint, its being is prolonged until it is able to corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it is made a cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the lancing of it until it is mature, it will cause harm to the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore lance it before it is ripe; and do not lance it when it is crude, of incomplete digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you may not be able to reach the perineum of it and extend it to the parts of the buttock, and make a fistula, or that it may be done in the term of it that it may not be healed. But more, you ought to know the hour of the lancing of the abscess, and thus it is when it is ripe.
And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and upon the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know the lancing to be done in the place furthest from the abscess and from pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And lancing always be by the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of lancing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to let the lancing of it until its digestion is confirmed according to the completion, as we have said; for if you lance it before that, it prolongates the course of its power and of much dirtiness, and therefore the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are lanced according to the latitude of the flesh or of the body as necessity demands, or according to what the member requires.
And you ought to administer small lancing, and in the large abscesses large lancing and wide or many incisions according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the incision ought to be concave and be incised, when it is done so that bread is made and it is done in the term that it already follows, such as those that occur in heaps of boils and buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision, and similar to those, are administered.
But that one to whom there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you ought to lance that with a superficial incision, or flat only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much sania, to lance it and not be covetous that you extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a greater part, and so do this many times according to the gradation until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the sania, and therefore the patient may die, and you operate on them.
And guard this chapter with great care, and in the lancing of these abscesses, you ought to abstain from plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is little, or a flat incision, then you administer the poultices of it or of cotto anti-septic; and if the abscess is large, and the incisions of the lancing are many, then you ought to put meca in each one until they arrive together.
And if in the abscess is incised a part of the incision or has concaved that in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with old cotto or a thread made of cloth of it, as when you have treated poultices or razors, its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process that and cure it with that which is ought of the ointments until it is healed.
But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and wine in which you have soaked a cloth, and place it on the location of the blood flow many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and follow the powders that I have recommended in many places in this very book and of division.
But if it is in winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must enclose powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the location.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and cleanse it and administer to its cure what is convenient to it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter .xli.
Of the incision of abscesses which come in the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head small abscesses, and they are of a kind of nodes which contain tunics that are to their making; and the kinds of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those it is that contain humidity similar to lime. And of those are those that contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling to them; and of those are those that are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the extraction of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in incision of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes near thus, the one which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split it with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begins in the section of the line of .B. within to the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times return, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge a cloth in Egyptian wash, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it in for another day, because with that you corrode all that is raw of that skin.
And then repeat on that cloth with Egyptian wash second and third time if you need it, until you are confident that there is no longer any raw cause of that skin; then cure the wound with wash until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scrape it from all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes opposition, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of incision and cure according to what I have told you; and incision on a stony abscess is easier, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some times there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with which there is no humidity at all; the cause of which is because I incised on an abscess in the head of an old woman and brought back the abscess as a hard, rough, white, which could not be punctured, and if anyone was struck with that, it would plague them.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other than this one, this is not this chapter, as well as the abscesses that come to the heads of the children and you must the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body be relieved of the blood in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is convenient for that cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and there are many that are generated among them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrofulas are many, because of those there are some stony, and of those there are that contain humidity, and of those are malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is maugre in all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not tender, then you must incise it with superficial section from the lower part to the upper part of the body from the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape it from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with a scalpel, or with many scalpels if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve be not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not injure your hand while inciding, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and you prohibit yourself from your operation, then the wound will stop with vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that within which the sharpness of the abscess remains and the wound is softened and begins to be pus-filled. When the blood is cut.
Therefore, return to your operation while you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small abscesses, therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large abscess, cover it so that you do not cut that abscess from its root. Cover it so that you place that with a strong bent iron and that you leave it there until it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut that abscess entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as pus comes out so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer a suture and that which is said.
And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation here where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation of it so that it lets the pus out from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer a perforation, poultices with ointment and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the section of the pile of the abscess that happens within the gullet.
The ancients said this section in the epiglottis, and no one has seen in our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a hernia, cover that the extraction of the epiglottis be avoided, as for that it is not done well for that all the veins and major arteries of the patient are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or gullet or both ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover using the section of the epiglottis to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, that they cut the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section for the width in the one that is between two circles by quantity, that the section be in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are few.
And if the physician is fearful, cover that he extends the throat of the gullet with an incision, and then make the incision until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause of them.
And then cut the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is signified over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that exit with that which is of it disrupted and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is remade in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the throat of the wound, and stitch that alone with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recounted, the exposition is not but that you see that some of those abscesses have already opened the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the air of it is contracted, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for this command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then cover the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in her throat and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of her, and I brought the woman back as she was dying, and I uncovered the wound and brought back the blood which was coming out of the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor guidegi, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured her until she was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if she did not recover her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement of her dispositions.
And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epilhot.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision on the abscess that occurs in the throat outside, and is called a throat hernia.
This abscess called a throat hernia is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not born to cure.
And the accidental one is in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is made by the blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cove that it be presumed to him as iron, but in that one that is small. And then you probe that and investigate that with the finger, and if you find it similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it as the nodes, and extract it with that which contains it from the skin and the bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize its whole being, and then cure the place with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision of the species of nodes.
Of nodes there are many species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I have to count thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as if there were a doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the superfluity is subsided; and it is a complication of putrefaction that at the hour ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts that which is the lion's head which is in its own sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a seed and it is made as a vessel, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you probe it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument that is called intromes, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is next to this.
And this way of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the abscess, and you revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then, finally, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And cut over it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this form: as you have been taught, and suspend it with forceps, and excise the core from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be so, and then you extract it in pieces until there remains no cause from it.
For if from it remains no cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over it that which sits abscess caut, and cure it from the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
But if a pulsating vein is in it opposite, or non-pulsating, then you cauterize and moisten the place of zegi trissat that is vitriol and leave that strait for two or three days until you can pierce the wound and that the boiling of the blood rests; and then return to incise that which is broken from the node.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and of them is medium, and of them is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They are made of iron, of lead, of extremities well-rounded, so that they facilitate the entrance into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experients, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
And there are three kinds, for of them is large, medium and small.
The shape of the large one, its form:
The shape of the medium one, its form:
The shape of the small one, its form:
It is conveyed that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and boils so that among them are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, long, like large needles with which the stitches are sewn, and they are made of citrus copper, or of lead or of iron, and the best are when they are made of citrus copper.
And they are made the instruments of black plum, the ones which are agreed that for those to be opened the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that they are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three species, for some of them are long, and of the others medium, and of the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the stricture of it.
Shape of the large plum instrument:
Shape of the medium plum instrument:
Shape of the small plum instrument:
The shapes of the probes are of many species, for of those some are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three species.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of those are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a simple small probe, shape of it:
Shape of a large probe having two curvatures: Shape of a medium probe having two curvatures: Shape of a small probe having two curvatures:
Shape of a large probe having three curvatures:
Shape of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for of those one is large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are blunt, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be made gently in the excoriation of the nodes the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and by those the disease may be healed and peace be restored a little by the application which brings the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium and small, as you see.
They are made of copper and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one runs to the parts inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and not perceived by the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three species; large, medium and small; the shapes of them:
They are made of citrus copper, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And know that these species of cupping glasses, you large, medium and small, so that by those you abscise the flow of blood with speed in necessity, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy locations, such as in the folds of the arms and thighs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groin, and similar to their fleshy and moist folds.
And sometimes those instruments are made other small ones resembling scorsas of fish according to this form; by which the blood is abscised when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the breasts of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes breasts of certain men become inflamed, like those that begin to be hairy, and then the breasts become inflamed, and the breasts are assembled like those of women, and they are pus-filled, they are removed.
And to him who has this, he must cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then scrape the entire thickness, and then fill the wound with a medicament of flesh color, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for him until it is healed.
But if the breast inclines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should to women, then it is cut in two parts, its surpluses, with two sections similar to the lunar figure, of which each one is contained in the other, as long as the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the flesh which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the powders, what is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of this one that must be cut because of the restlessness of the patient, and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrosive one that is the flesh, and then care for him until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the kind of scrofulas, hard, which contain a skin that is removed.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as soon as everything that is in the abscess of the healthy is evacuated, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a suitable ointment to it, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind of nodes and scrofulas, then you cut it as we have said in the section on scrofulas similarly.
But if the wound is extended so that it is a pockmark, then administer cauterizing in it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur because of an artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the flesh which is over it is consolidated, then many times abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are from the artery or vein: that when the abscess is from the artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you pierce the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
And that one which is from the vein is red and manifest on the front of the body.
And incision over this abscess is an error, and most of all in those that are from the armpits, and the corners, and the neck, and many other places of the body; and it is very large, so that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that one which is in the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
But over that one which is from the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut in the flesh a long section; and then probe the section with a probe and the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other part, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which cause you to see in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then poke the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is removed, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which it is generated power until the ligaments fall; and then care for it with suitable ointments to it until it is healed.
And if the abscess is from the section of a vein, then you must have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the flesh, and then introduce the needle from the place which you have had from your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other part, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle from all the abscess, besides the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it until when it is issued the water that is in it, then you cut the superfluity of the flesh, and leave what of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or when they are overworked, and similarly.
And it is made most in the places of the helpers or the heel, or in any place where the joints are sore.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the major parts of it dispositions are seen, and when it is tightened with violence, the patient feels in it a seeming stupor.
And it is not an abscess added in the front of the body, and for that it is left the code, and it is sore to all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be treated with iron, because it will certainly cause a contraction.
But the one that is in the head or in the front, treat it with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take that with the forceps and cut it to the root.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with a hook, and excise it, and then you cover it; and adjust the wound with suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 2.
Of the section of an abscess which occurs from a boil that occurs to the belly.
And it happens to some men, growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, which are called fungals because of their similarity to fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were reversed and they were splitting, and humidity was running from it all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and brought out in one of them about eighteen inches. and the other about six inches.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider, then if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle root; then you should cut it with a spatula, and be in your presence cauterize it with fire, because many times the secretion of it must be expelled with much blood; and if you come to the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a piece of recent lead made, and strengthen it with that boil, the manner of which is that we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly, until it is excised and falls by itself with its work.
But if the boil is of a thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of terror, and more so in the one that is in the belly.
But it is possible that you should cut most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to cut the boil which is of a dark color, of little feeling, of slight regard, for that is an abcess cancerous.
And I come with the remembrance of cancer, then.
Chapter 3.
Of the cure of an eminence of the navel.
An eminence of the navel is made for many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is over the belly, and veins of it the tissue or intestine according to what it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what is said before, or by wind contracted in it.
But if it is by fissure of the fascia and by protrusion of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lean in its pain, and then appears from different situations. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then the situation of it with it of what we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is hidden, and then it returns; and very much is felt in it, and it is magnified much by the entrance of bath and vehement work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is lean and it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it increased.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess in a dark decline.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lean.
And the operation in it is that you consider, then if the eminence of the navel is by blood of artery, or of vein, or by wind; then it is necessary that you should be prohibited from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia or a tumor, then command the patient to hold their leg, and be standing extended; and then feel with your finger around the entire navel, and then command them to lie between their hands on their back, and then surround it with a broad spatula around the area which you have felt with the finger; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large probe; and then tie it around with a strong thread or with a cord in the manner of tying properly.
And then insert the tip of the probe extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that area and seek the hernia; and if you have found it or guarded it by the ligament, then you extract it and push the hernia to the sides of the belly.
And if you have found the tumor, then take it with a probe; and cut away the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the spot until the flesh can extend and fall by itself; or cut it when it is softened and can be cut, and then cure it with water which the physicians prescribe until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then command that you make the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure it with water which the physicians prescribe and which consolidates the area.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the special kinds of cancer and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is dangerous to treat it with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated in the marrow and the caution of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, as in cancer that is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it is just beginning small.
But when it is ancient and is large, do not command yourself to it, because I have not been able to heal from that at all, nor have I seen another, nor that has come to that.
And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you proceed and leave the patient and purge of black cholera sometimes, and then bleed him, if a manifest repletion is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is located for the operation, and prohibit in the tract the probes which command to that; and concave from all parts with the good codena careful extraction so that no remains any cause of the roots of it. And let the blood run, and do not cut it lightly, and express the places, and absorb the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which is at your disposal of the instruments.
But if it causes you trouble of thick blood incision of vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is ceased, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of dropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the kinds of dropsy of water, and the signs of each kind, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the kind of timpanistres nor to the kind of yposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this kind of timpanistres dropsy with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if the patient already has achieved weakness, or is with that other illness another dropsy, as if it is in his cough or body of the belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but dropsy alone, and not a child nor an old man, then the manner of the operation of him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, impelling the water to the side below the navel, and then take a spatula spines according to this form:
it is of two parts sharp long, of sharp extremity as a spatula; but however, let it be in it some shortness small by small, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the hernia, and that you lead that.
And consider if the generation of dropsy is of the part of the hernias, because then command that with the section you are distanced from the navel for the quantity of three digits to the sides below, in the right of him over the navel.
But if the generation of dropsy is by illness of the liver, then your section be left of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of him is by the measles, then the incision should be on the right side.
And do not let the incision be on the side where the patient wants to cough, so that the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument the entire chain, and then introduce into that incision, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of a fingernail or around.
And then pierce the siphon until the spatula reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the shape: and is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, to which at the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the end of it most sovereign is an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately it rises upon the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate more of that which is not due in the hour, very soon the patient will die by resolution of his animal spirit, or it will happen to him five-pi that is approaching death.
But evacuate of that according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you of the virtue of the pulse of it and of the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes is for it is immediately retained by the chain which retains the hole which is on the siphon of which and recommits to you that you pierce it according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates water, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do water for some days out of fear, and guard yourself from error so that it does not remain of the water but little.
But if you fear about the patient, and let out of the water a large quantity, then cure that with burial in damp sand, and move him to a bath, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the measles and the fig,  approach the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what is preceding.
Chapter .lx.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of urine unpierced.
Sometimes some of the children are born from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or it is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to return with the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then place in the hole a small lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate, it will be disturbed and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is already possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not leave that opening.
But that one of whom the hole is straight, be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are ledged, the cause is that of those, that one who is born and the hole is the end of the head of the vagina because it cannot urinate in the middle parts, until it elevates the vagina with its hand to the upper parts; and it is not to its generation, for so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in it is that the patient be inverted upon its two, and then extend the head of the vagina of it with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscise the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is incision of a feather, or that you do not scrape any part, so that the middle of it comes to resemble the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place according to what is due.
And guard yourself that in your operation of flux of blood, for many times accidents happen with water; and pause yourself to it with water that you have separated the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albation which happens in the prepuce in the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albation happens in the vagina and is a prominence of flesh very bad.
And of that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
The non-malignant one, it is necessary that you suspend it with a fine needle and cut that until that it is all gone; and then place upon that a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then that, cure it with diaphicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the albation is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you administer cautery near the incision of it and the rawness of it.
But if there is pus in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the pus is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must drain the pus that is inside first while it is still fresh; and then you treat the pus that is outside, because when you treat the pus at the same time as the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
And if there are black and foul blemishes on the genitals and foreskin, then you must cleanse all that which is already corrupted and which is about to corrupt or which is already corrupted; and then apply a poultice on that which is corrupted with honey, which is mixed with ground quince peel and dried and crushed herbs.
And then treat it with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because a helpful cautery is in two dispositions at once, so it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the meat of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that of whom the foreskin is his, and on which circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) you must excise with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released entirely.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of silk, which is already soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with a poultice of vi stiptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: but since it is of our operation and our will, and it is proper to those of our children, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way less harmful to health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause of which is that I have found the majority of artificers and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and with torches; and they use a ligature with a thread and an incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these ways and have not found better purification with scissors, with a ligature with thread than with purification with the nail, because many times the cord escapes from below, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains deeper, and very easily it is forced to another incision and sure pain. And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because very easily it enters into the tract of it.
But in the operation with the nail, very easily it obscures iron and corrupts your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown to me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharps, and incision is made according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the penis entirely, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand most if it is of those who understand a little, that you do nothing but tie the thread in its penis alone, and that you leave that in for the other day.
And then do that with all that manner that is to your possibility of what receives its intelligence. And then make him stand between your legs, prepared, and do not be gescent; and conceal the scissors in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then introduce your hand to his penis and puff in the cord, and pull that until it is issued the head of the penis, and then purify that which is added in it of filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let one be non-cutting and the others cutting, that the ram of the key is not removed, and the length of the two points is as the length of two arms equally.
But the error in modification is that if the strong one flees the intrinsic chain entirely, or part of it, you must make the incision.
Therefore, as you extend that one with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the place and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that one with a pin and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and what is swollen remains, after the abscess, then you let it enter until the abscess is cauterized, and exfoliate it with ease, and cut it according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the abscess, for it would not be good for it.
And therefore cure it with that which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is cut from the chain beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, then it will not be good for it.
But cure it with that which we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by obstruction caused by a stone or by congealed blood, or by pus or by flesh, and similar to those of water which we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with that which we have said and the cause is very strong upon the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and it is a subtle cone, as well as a pipe of bird bone with a subtlety of a ray long in similarity of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle tube in the head of it.
And the manner of the emission of the urine by this one is that you take the faithful doubled and tie it in the middle of the wool or thread for a good binding; and introduce the extremities of the faithful in the part below of the syringe, and cut it with the forceps if there is any superfluity of wool, but introduce it into the tube with force, and then introduce the syringe with border and with album of egg.
And make the patient lie on the bed, and rub his bladder and the abscess with olive oil, and olive oil, and water.
And then introduce the syringe with ease until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and then double the abscess above at the part of the navel; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient has arrived at the root of the cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And then extend the faithful with the wool little by little, for the urine will soak the wool.
Then extract that one and do for the cure of urine, and use syringe, do not cease to do this and use syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to this.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or congealed blood in that, or it is constricted by a constriction, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
But in the middle of it is closed, so it is closed. And in that there are three tubes: two from one part, as well as the other.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which is the water that is expelled, and as much as it is expelled, it is added, until when any cause is taken by that of the humidities, it is thrown away, and when it is expelled with water, it is thrown away, and when it is expelled long, according to how the clampcedra is done with which is phicat naphta in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to introduce humidities into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and throw with that the water that is expelled to the parts above, so that the humidity is thrown into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the abscess as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push the humidity with that which you push, so that that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
The form of the catheter is subtle, by which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or lead, of which the tip is like a small feather, and there is a tube inside it.
And then take the bladder by its root, and place in it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligature, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand over the bladder with the humidity and structure descending until the patient feels that the humidity has reached the bladder.
But if you do not feel the bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that with all its roundness; and then introduce a strong thread into those holes, so that it is turned; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofat, because you put in that water that you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that onto the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of stones.
We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which the operation is done with the hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is located in the bladder.
And I am narrating that with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stones generated in the bladder mostly come to children; and the signs of it are that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his urethra, and many times it hurts, and then it is dressed; and with this, they feel the anus in many of those.
And it is easier the cure of children of those who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is milder because of what is between those.
And of that one in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must, at the beginning of it, modify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the fistula that is in their bowels; because that fistula sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone, and therefore the investigation of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and have them sit and moan in a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what jumps from that place or sometimes.
And then make that cushion between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are placed on the things of him, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the parts below.
And then pierce that and all of that through.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately cut with a section above it.
And if you do not catch all of it from your touch, then you must have that with oil your said finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said finger if it is a young complete, and introduce that into their anus. And pierce the stone until it is below your said finger. And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your said finger, and expel that to the outside parts before the place where you made the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand massages the cord which is below the genitals, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then introduce a spatula, well incident, of which this is the form: And split in it the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but on the left side of the vagina; and let the section be above that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that emerges from the stone be possible, and no more, because it is very difficult to compress your finger which is in the anus the stone and it is thrown out of its faculty.
And know that of the stone there are some that have an angle and margins, so that the extraction of it is made difficult because of that.
And of that one, water is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light extraction.
Therefore, if it is that one with its angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus thrown out, then you must engage upon that, or that you strengthen upon that with a decent gesture, the tip of which is like a file with which you strengthen upon the stone, and do not escape from it; or that you introduce below it a subtle instrument of curved tip.
But if you cannot place it there, then you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cauterize it with vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then you cut above it; and then you push a little bit further, and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two things: either it dies or it makes a continuous flow of urine, because of which the area is not completely consolidated.
But administer the expulsion of it while it is outside, or devise in the fracture of it with the forceps while you extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloe and dragon's blood, and cauterize it. And place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and rubbed water, so that the abscess may be cauterized.
And then turn the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you have untied it, wash the area with water and oil, and then cure it with a diaphana and a diazilaco enema until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs a cauterized, putrid, and corrosive abscess, and of this kind as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and for this reason urine is forbidden (and this is known by the emission of blood in urine), then with your instrument in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all kinds, with the water that you deem convenient for its cure until it is healed.
And cover in all the hours of the whole cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed upon the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and it is lodged there, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with the water that I recommended before you arrive at the incision, because troops of times by this cure it is accused of incision; and I have already explained this, and it is that you take a pointed iron perforator, of which this is the form of it:
triangular in its end, sharp, inserted into a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie it with that the urethra so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that stone. And revolve the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you perforate the hole of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand over what is broken of the stone from the opening of the urethra, because that is fractured, and is expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not available to you for any reason which prohibits it, then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then cut above the stone in that urethra between the two ligatures. And then extract it. And then untie the ligature and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is untied, the stone's emission, the bladder returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the bladder to the upper parts, or that you return to your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely generated.
But if a stone is seen in any of those, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many manners.
One of them is that the woman is very likely a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-knowing who describes herself to the physician when she is chaste, or is of women having husbands.
The third is that you do not have a woman well-knowing this art, mostly the operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision over the stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, because you indiges of a pre-existing incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity provokes you to this, then cove that you take a female physician well-knowing, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a male physician who is well-skilled and subtle, or present a female matron well-experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has a part of the art.
Therefore, do that, and command him to do everything that you order him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason for this is that he should see if the woman is a virgin, then when he puts his finger in her anus and wants the stone.
Therefore, if he finds that, force him to put his finger in, and then command him to insert over it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends it with good understanding.
Therefore, if he finds it, then he must gradually withdraw it from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the utmost care, until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert it over that position of the majority of the vagina, at the root of the vagina, from whichever part it is stopped and center the stone in that part, and the said one of him should not be removed from the stone, short of him.
And the section should be little at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that section, and if he feels the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which he knows that the stone is thrown from that.
And know that the kinds of stones are many: for some are small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many kinds are of it for what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissat and take that for an hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments the ones which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you place powder over the place and tighten that with powders and constriction descends, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very likely the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is ceded after a few days, and the place can be touched, then you return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
Chapter LXII.
Of incision on hernia.
Hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white tunic which is below the codpiece of the genitals containing the urine, and it is named tunic.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has it prepared nature in the part of the urine, before that it is known that already there is another urine; and it is the codpiece of the genitals between the white tunic which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is for weakness which happens to the genitals, for that to those is poured this matter, and some times it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this moisture is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or red, or it is black and slimy, or it is aqueous white, and this is what is most.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is: for if it is in the white tunic which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little to length as such as the figure of the urine, and appears the genitals, for the moisture contains that of all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round in the part of the urine and by this man estimates that it is another urine.
And if the moisture is between the codpiece of the genitals and the white tunic, then cats below the feeling.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you probe the color of the moisture in the abscess with an introme that the form is preceded by; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the introme, judge of what is there of it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then we must command the patient to be fleubotomized if that is to you possible, and times the body of him full.
And then be recumbent on his back upon some cause a little high, and place below him many cloths.
And then sit you on the left part of him, and command the minister that follow on the right of him, the one which extends his arm to one of two sides to the codpiece of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula late and scindeys the codpiece of the genitals of the middle place by the length until near the penis.
And be made the section according to rectum equally distant from the line that devesys the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white tunic comprehending.
And excoriate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert that; and your excoriation with the one which you excoriate by a wide part that it be suspended with the urine most and subtly scrutinize with the excoriation according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals contained, and incise the bladder in that manner that is to you possible. And incise that [bladder] with its totality or in parts, and mainly its subtle side, because if you do not meticulously scrutinize the incision of it, it is not done with certainty that the water does not return.
But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its cord during the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and then care for it as well as the other plagues, until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another malady, then you must cut the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the humor, and then care for it with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts at the same time, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other, equally; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the miraculous part of the belly; and place above cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then they are taken two cloths and they are filled with carded wool according to this resemblance; and they are made the extremities with which it is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and they are added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock inside to the other, and the second presses at the part of the knee, and two extremities above two cushions of wool and two other extremities upon two pads, and all the structure is adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautery knife and that you incise with that the cord of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted until it is discovered the white bladder containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: And it is assembled like a Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cautery, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the bladder with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to what is to you possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself that the humor that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from a flow of blood, and better than an operation with section.
But if to you there arises a contrary state abscess caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or a flow of blood, then you must cure what contrary state does to you by that, with a cure which you convene to it according to what is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer a perforation according to what we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified that you, by what we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then you must make the patient lie on some elevated cot, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
And then place over the location cloth and tie that and leave it, so that the remaining water flows out. And then care for it until the plague is healed.
But if a contrary state is in the emission of the water at that hour you pierce that: and this is not done except for that which the white panniculus in the orifice of the plague causes contrary state and prohibits the emission of the water, then you must put in the plague a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropites, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opening of the plague a small one.
And know that the water returns, and is aggregated again after about six months or around those; and as it is aggregated, then it is perforated according to that same manner, so that the patient thus passes his days.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of section over a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section over this hernia there is fear of losing to pernicious in the major dispositions; for to me it is seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And I you remembering the operation in that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: or by acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious abscess.
And the abscess is hard, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is made by a knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those in such a way that already the memory of it is perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is due to the inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and no cover that you touch.
But that which is made by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from it by any cause of the compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this kind a section is made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the point of the scalpel, and then extend the fluid to the lower parts, and extract that from the white part, and deliver the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspender more than you deliver it from all parts of the fluid.
Therefore, if the fluid is already with those carnations consolidated, then you must extract the fluid and incise it.
And if there is adherence for any cause of the white part, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adherence and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the fluid as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the belly.
A hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking over the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is by fear for that of which is preceded memory.
However, it is necessary to say operation in that according to which I did the first.
And I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then you peel the suspenders of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the point of the scalpel with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other minister that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then incise with a broad sharp knife with a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate from all parts as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which is double thread, and tie that in the first of the places in which you have incised the hernia, and tie that other time in the back of them. And then incise those in the middle place with a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated of the putrid and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you wish to be healed so that the vessels which are severed one of the two genitals, because it is not harm for that.
But if you have incised all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by that be tied with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or tied so that it not be helpful with those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that should be in the white part extended over the belly of the part of the angles of the navel of the belly, because by sending the intestines of that rupture to one of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the white part or of excencio of it, and these two species are caused by many causes: either percussion, or seizures, or clamor, or elevation of any heavy cause, or semblance.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the white part, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal between the veins of the preon because the white part compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is by section of the white part, because at the beginning it makes happen a vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess different appearing below the proper cord appearing, and that is by the extrusion of the intestine, and the body of it to the parts before the white part.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine the net, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the intestine wound, and here it is retained, and it is with this great harm of the patient, and sometimes it makes become a bad pain and more when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the kinds of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary that it be avoided the hunting in that.
And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts within his cavity, if he obeys his return, and then place it over his belly between your hands, and elevate his legs.
And then tighten the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and incise the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix the two lips of the section with pins according to how you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that is possible for you that from that the pus be discharged.
And then scrape that which is covered by the cord of the testicles, until the white hard capsule of each part is uncovered.
Then you introduce your finger into that which is the testicle, into that which is between the white capsule, which is left the cord of the testicle, and between the second capsule, and dissolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the testicle.
And then put with your hand the cord of the testicles to the parts before, and with this extend the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and elevate the testicle with the capsule to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the testicle upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard capsule. But if you find of it any cause, then you place it into the belly below.
And then incise in the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which blood runs and heals as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool immersed in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and some times the white capsule is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of it fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the ligature until it falls by itself.
But if the case of it is delayed, then of hot water be embroiled, and place it on that until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of a suction hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been seen to have been bold in the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the disruption that is made in the  anguonars.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the anguonars as we have said, and it emerges the place.
And do not leave to the genitals any cause of the intestines in the genitals; and if they leave, that is little; and returns it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, it is adjusted fissure in the capsule so that the intestine descends into the capsule; and it occurs that by the extension of the capsule which is in the anguonars as we have said, which cause is that the capsule is extended, and then it is softened and the place is suppurated and emerges.
And the cure of it is with cauterization as it is preceded the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lays upon his two between your hands, and then dries the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerged with section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then tighten the white capsule which is below the cord until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place that upon the place eminent of the capsule, and press that to the preon of the belly.
And then sew the two eminent places upon the extremity of the ray of the capsule, and adjust with the suture one of those with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not cut into the entire head, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause as I have told you to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the sores, and as you cut the fibers, cleanse that and restore the sore while it is consolidated; because the head is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of softening the cord of the testicles.
Sometimes the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is felt in the regard of it.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it to make the patient lie according to his two, and cut all the cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure for the cure of the other sores while it is healed and the fibers fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for cause it is written to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which one is that it be in the knowledge of the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often have need of castration of other animals for our benefit, such as goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be immersed in hot water until its genitals are softened and are limp and hang. And then take those with your hand while they are relaxed and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, as soon as you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles of it with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensory, and cut over each testicle with a section between the two testicles processed.
And then cut those which you will have each excoriated. And do not let on those of the head any cause, but the subtle head which is above the veins.
And this way of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the sore while it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that it appears in that which separates the space in the cord of testicles, in that one which is between two testicles figures as a cunh of woman in which it is.
And sometimes from that cord urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman over the pental is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished at the front part as if it were the perpucii of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that as soon as you cut those adjusted flesh while it ejects the impregnation of it, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other sores.
And in the second species of men of which you see urine which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lenting is often adjusted due to natural causes while it is stressed and is made visible; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads as in men and interferes with coitus.
Therefore, as soon as you have the superfluity of lenting with your hand or with an instrument and cut it.
And do not cut too deeply, especially in the prepuce of the penis, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then cure it with the cure of sores until it is healed.
But flesh born is flesh that is born in the horrifici of the mother while it fills it, and often it is ejected to the front parts according to the resemblance of a tail (and for that reason some first call it "caudal disease"); therefore, as soon as we cut it as we cut lenting, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of hernia.
Hernia is when the woman's womb is not perforated, or the tract is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that preceded it, and that is made either by flesh not well adjusted or by a subtle or thick cicatrix.
And it is made either in the front of the womb, or in the sides of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits the use of coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and very strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examining the womb, if the opacity is apparent, promptly; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with the rod.
But if the opacity is due to a subtle cicatrix, and it is present in the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you place on the two labia powders, and then you place your fingers, indicating both sides at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force until that subtle cicatrix is broken and the opacity is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and jagua with honey every day so that the incised area is not consolidated.
But if the cicatrix is thick and thick, then you cut that with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
But if the opacity is due to flesh, then suspend that with a thread, and incise it.
And be with you the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood by biting, such as hacacatia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plague is not consolidated slightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calx of lime.
And then it is cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the womb during childbirth of other flesh, and then you cut according to this manner. But if this is due to a carbuncle, to the carbuncle which is in the womb, let no contrariety be made with iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botter that happens in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of the orifices of many veins through which blood flows continuously; and as they are old hemorrhoids and are made they are called piles.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I said thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the front of the womb and do not appear to the touch, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the womb upon which one feels, those are the ones that are cured.
And you must put the woman in a high chair and then extend the pile with the scissors, or with rough cloth, and incise it with the roots.
And then sprinkle on those of the fluxes of blood of one of the incisive powders by biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then apply hot compresses to her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that seizer in decoction of suma and of the skins of millegrains and of gualas and of similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a poultice with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, make adhere to two ventouses, and to the nipples its scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of cilantro or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with vinegar and make adhere to the place; and then cure the place with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of perforation of the eyssedura accident in the womb.
Many species of carbuncles happen in the womb, such as carbuncles, lapidary abscesses, ulcers, and buboes, and eruptions, and hemorrhoidal fistulas, and rags, and piles, and other abscesses. And I have already said these maladies and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And I must say in this treatise of an abscess that comes in the womb when it is of the abscesses that coalesce and heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if you feel it on that, then do not cut it with perforation of it, and cure it with that which helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then have the woman lie on a couch that has two supports; and recline on her two sides and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie something with a suitable bandage.
And then the woman follows the right side and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the womb is opened, the shape of which will come in those causes that will be done then.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you put it on the ray of the womb of the woman, and what from the instrument is entered into the womb not be more than the ray of the womb and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the ray of the womb, then have you put powders on the texture of the ray of the womb so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instruments in the ray of the womb.
And have you put the verve that runs in the instrument of the right side and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the verve until the orifice of the womb is opened.
And when the excision appears, and is touched with the hand and is clean and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then have you put in the wound a meca submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which there is some stickiness; and place the calca in the section in the ray of the womb.
And place before the womb and on the penile linen clean submerged in water in which there are boiled mallows.
And then it is cured about two days with rinsing which is convenient to it until it is healed.
And sometimes the womb and the wound are washed so that it is christened with water and honey, and then with water in which lily root or long-stalked aristella is boiled, and then returns to the rinsing.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care of it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living fetuses should be medicated when they are second nature.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by signs of it, and that when you see the woman expressing in the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is relieved by that which is on her from the birth, and hastens the delivery of the fetus, then you know that this birth is second nature, and it is the delivery of it on its head, and the second with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then have you compress the belly of it so that the fetus descends slightly, and when it descends on its head, you give it the second, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this birth is unnatural and not laudable, because when the fetus is issued on its feet and the body of it is issued before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it. i., or it is issued the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted on its neck, and resembling of the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard herself from error and deception.
And you have shown all figure of those, and which kind is in those for so that it be signified by it and be stood upon it.
When the fetus is issued on its head by natural egrecio, and that is vehement on the woman and is done to it difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conn of it with fenugreek cooked and with humid oils.
And then introduce the metrona between its said spatula small and fenda with it the second, or cut that with its nail until it flows that which is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fetus.
But if it does not descend, then have the woman be christened with mucellage of ptilli and mucellage of fenugrec with a razor.
And then command to it, to the christening, that it be compressed and make that stornudar with condisi; and take the mouth of it and the nose of it for an hour, because the fetus will be for-gotten soon.
And if the two masses of the fetus are for-gotten at the beginning, then have you reduce those with facility little by little. But if it does not obey to the instrument, then have the woman lie on a couch and raise her legs, and then convince the couch on the ground; and the woman be held that she not fall by the concussion.
And if the fingers are not immediately returned and the foot dies, then cut those and extract the dead flesh from the foot or tie the limb to the hand with a cloth and extract it with equality, because that is the way to avoid further damage.
When the fetus is lying on its feet, then you must press those upwards, and then turn the small fetus, and then straighten it, and then take one foot of it and extend those little by little.
But if it comes out between the thighs, then you command it to express itself, and do that expulsion with care, because that is the way to avoid further damage if God wills it.
And if it is not avoided with what we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until you place it back in its natural position, because that is how it is avoided with gentle placement.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take of  mussellage of althea and dissolved gum, and pound all in the mortar with good percussion, and then apply it with that to the woman's womb, from the lowest part of her belly. And then make that cesser in boiling water, until it obtains the hypocondriac.
And when the parts of her are softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for her and sub-place that for her. And when you have fumigated her for an hour, then make her sit on a cushion, and then do that expulsion and extract her mouth, and remove from that, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, because the fetus will be soon avoided.
Placement of the fetus latitudinally while holding one of its hands. Be gentle in reducing the hand of it, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go.
And if she cannot go, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement concussion, and then administer ointments as I have taught and recommended of mucillages.
And if the birth has come, then make her sit on a cushion, and then study about the reduction of the hand, and straighten the fetus according to its natural position, and do the expulsion for the woman and command her to express herself until it is avoided.
Placement of the fetus on its back with its arms and the fascia of it on the side of its mother. Make sure the midwife has the hand of the fetus and gently turns it little by little, and that it is facilitated.
And when it is and as much as it is straightened, and then place upon her womb that which we have recommended of oil and mucillages.
And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a cushion and command her to be inclined on her right side, and then command her to be compressed; and do that expulsion with care. Exit of the prepared fetus on its side.
When the horror of the mother is removed in this manner, consider, and then you cut the second with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and the neck of it, then you cut that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus to the parts below until you place that second which you have, and send the woman to express herself several times, and it will be avoided with gentle placement, if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and difficult; but it is caused by nature, and not by life.
And count those, whether they be multiplied, one second, and are separated by the placenta, distinguish them between the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are avoided as if it were one fetus by gentle natural placement, and they are placed sometimes by unnatural placement as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and reach what we have said of unnatural figures, then you take care of them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all figures according to what is prepared for her by the art bringing to health.
A remembrance of it that is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes, some pregnancies are formed in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it is already known to me that one woman aborts six, and another bears ten, which cause was made by the measurement of the glorious wise.
And all this cove that is in the science of the midwife, that it is very well known to that appearance of this, and therefore it is paused to this as much as it cove.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medication and it is not outside of it, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not in any of the accidents by which she is feared for loss.
Then consider that the woman be laid upon the sheet upon her back, and her head be inclined downwards and her thighs be elevated.
And the minister has those of two parts or be tied in the sheet so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oil and mucilage of althea and fennel and seed of lily.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then introduces her hand with facility into the mother, and then seeks with the hand in the place where the forceps are in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends upon its head, and then you place the forceps in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or even the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or even the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon the feet of it, then in the penile, or in the middle of the back.
And consider that you have the forceps with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and introduce the hand with facility and place the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until you arrive at the left cause.
And then pause and place in the position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be extension according to its rectitude only.
And be careful to every part, so that the emission of it be alleviated as it is done in the time of the eradication of it.
And consider in it that which is between them that the extension be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then consider that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them with skill and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is outside, then the forceps are changed into the place which is more out; and do so until all the fetus is outside.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then consider that a cloth be enveloped over it; and then extract it until all is outside, and incise it either in the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so consider that you do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to it constriction in the emission, or is in the head of it water adjusted, then consider that you introduce between the fingers the spine and split the head and extract the water, or what discards this with an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly do if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then consider that you incise it with the algematu, or that you press it with the alunda as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is outside and is constricted by the fork, then it is split until the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys to emission, then you incise the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the remains of the womb are apostate or are in it hydrophic, then consider that you perforate it until the running of the humidity that is in it.
But if the fetus is upon its feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the feet, then consider that you extract that with the cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and that you make the belly and the feet until the water runs out of those.
But if the other limbs are still and the head turns, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she inserts her hand into the perineum of the woman, and with that she takes the head, and pulls it into the mouth of the mother, and then inserts a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess, cauterize the one that occurs to the woman; then cover it so that it is not touched; rather, administer an infusion of humid fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on the side, then if possible, it should be pricked; and administer the water that we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
And make sure that you leave no cause of the second birth.
And when you have completed the entire operation, then administer the water that we have said for the cure of the cauterizations that occur to the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then send them down in styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly there was a dead fetus, and then, on that very same fire, another pregnancy, and then, on that same fire, the fetus is another. It happened to a woman a long time ago an abscess in her navel; and it inflated so much that it opened, and began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of it, and medicated it for a long time, and the plague did not consolidate.
Then I placed on it some causes of a strong plaster, and extracted a bone from it, and after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was very amazed, as there were no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, I continued to treat the abscess, and extracted more bones from it, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, cured of it a little bit of pus.
And I do not affirm that it was strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the doctor artifices with his hand for cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the forceps with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the spreader in which the blades are joined, to which joining there are two forceps at the two extremities of two blades. But however, this forceps should be more subtle than the spreader, and be made either of ebony or of a branch of beech.
And let the width of each shaft be two fingers, and the margin of each be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two shafts are two adjustments of that same shaft, which are already fastened, of which the length is the majority of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed forceps.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ebony or beech shafts according to the resemblance of forceps. But however, at the extremity of it there are two attachments as seen, and the length of those attachments is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And as you want to open the mother with those, then you make the woman lie on the litter with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the midwife makes sure that you want.
The form of forceps that the ancients said:
Form of the impellent with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of the amisidat2 with which the large head is contained
And it is assembled like forceps with teeth at the extremity, as seen, and sometimes it is made long as forceps according to this form, as seen, to which there are teeth as teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. Form of the amisidat a little:
Form of an unci having a spine:
Form of an unci having two spines:
Form of a spatum having two extremities with which the head is cut off:
Form of two broad spatums:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied the species of it and are prepared, the artificer, as much as is lighter to his operation and as much as is more convenient for men by their quantity.
And do not use those instruments, no matter what, because the need for them is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the second.
When the second is retained, the enfantament should be commanded, so that you command the patient to retain their breath, and then make that stornudar, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over the nostrils of it, and if by this it is expelled, it is good.
And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the cover a hole and put in it herbs inside the mouth of the mother, such as calament and rue and aneth and chamomile and siccated arabic and cassia lignea and santaurea. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and put that over the fire.
And then put a straw of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stornudar as we have said, and the second is expelled with speed.
But if this cure remains and it is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the cone and seek the second with that, and as she has found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the perineum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the second, extract it little by little, according to rectum, so that the mother does not feel the traction violently. It should be changed to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with sturnutation and with medication of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not tire on that in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is expelled from it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cloth of the woman, and then christenize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it soften and after a few days it will be dissolved and expelled.
But when it may be possible, it is of it elevated bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that leads the patient; and therefore it should be administered sub-fumiguacios and conveniences to that.
But some of the Ancients already know sub-fumigacio of nazitort and of dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated should the retention of menses and of the second:
It should be made of silver or of brass.
And it should be placed the fine extremity in the cone and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigacio should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside so that the sub-fumigacio is consumed and iterate another.
Of cure of the unperforated infant's anus.
Many infants are born and the anus of them is not perforated, the ones which already have a subtle and opilated cicatrix. Therefore, it should be commanded to the midwife to perforate with her finger that cicatrix; and if not, perforate that with a sharp spatum, and guard that it does not touch the sphincter.
And then place on that wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure that with enguent until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will be opilated, then place in the hole a straw for many days, and remove it when the child will want to swallow.
And already accidents oppilation of the anus by consolidation of plaque or of abscess; therefore it should be commanded that that consolidation be incised, and then be cured with that which we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of cure of the fistulas that develop from the anus.
The fistulas that develop in the parting of the anus pus low node and thickness the ones which develop near the anus outside or in the space of the one parting.
And it is a fistula or many.
And as that node is antiquated and runs of the humid whey white or subtle puss, and some times from these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by that which is expelled from them by the egress and by windiness; and some times use the patient of egress, and forth leu is expelled from them worms.
And from these fistulas some times in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and from these penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
And that in which is known fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and introduce a subtle tenta of brass or of iron into the fistula when there is no turtuosity.
But if in that there is turtuosity, then introduce into that a subtle tenta of lead or of horse hair until you feel the tenta or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel any of that, nor do you notice any cause of digestion, worms, or flatulence, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and therefore you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place with medicine may be consolidated.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then the sign of it is that the fistulous opening penetrates here, if there is no tumor inside the bone, and pain in the circulation of the limb; and that from it pus always flows; and that in that medicine, it is not cured, nor is it consolidated by rinsing.
And in all those fistulas penetrating there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the toil and vanity of the medical leaves on which it is based.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and what I have already proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and elevates his legs into them, the thighs being inclined towards his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or of iron if there is a tumor in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe goes.
And if the patient feels the probe around the buttock, then you cover with your hand the buttock.
And if you feel in your hand the probe already by itself penetrating, or another that you feel between your hand and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is cured in some men tart.
And of the medicine by which help is expected in it is that you ignite a cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited one into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those carns adjusted to the fistula have been cauterized, which are similar to the feather quill of a bird.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until all those carns that are cauterized can be covered, and then cure that with medicines the flesh engendering and consolidating, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your hand which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is always a space of flesh or of skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which is the surface of the buttock, then dry the buttock from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe it is liberated and catched.
And then purify those carns that are assembled like the feather quill of a bird and do not break from any of them.
But if flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are inserting those carns, then the best that may be and of the lighter pus instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those carns adjusted, and abscess of the blood excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in a caul of tripe until the place gets a brace, and then cure the plague with rinses of hard flesh engendering and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is styptication and excretion; when then it is restored it is already healed and you fear no iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the perineum of the buttock and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then introduce your hand into the buttock and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is always a space of skin or flesh, and it is proper to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but according to my advice and of hope.
Which cause is to administer in it one of three ways: or that you cauterize it as we have said; or that you dry it until you obtain the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to introduce your fingers and the proper cure; and do not proceed with a cut so that you do not injure the sphincter containing the buttock, and that occurs on the patient as a result of the digestion of its will; and then cure that with what we have said, because it is very strong if it heals; or that you elongate that veil and cleanse that pus that dries that inside the buttock, as we have said, or with a probe or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and then purify those carns that are in the section within which you can make a perforation; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with section, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus light flows from the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the buttock around the surface of the body with the buttock and on the margin of the buttock, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is as if a needle for preparing the hearts according to this form:
And within that faithful envelope of v fibers or around those; and then try to introduce a thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the edge of the anus, then you extract the thread from that tract so that you introduce your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and adjust the two ends simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the thread more deeply into the flesh, tighten it well so that those flesh which are between the two ends of the thread and which are closing.
And then care for the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner it is prepared for you, so that it is moved in the preon, because it is not for you to do this so that you do not cut the skin; and then do it until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum spinos with which the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes happens.
Of suturing hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two manners, because they are between the anus like that which is of cartilage, or those which are like the fat of a ram. And of those there are small and large, and that blood runs from those always and is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the few humidity, of which water citrina or a little blood with a continuous body runs, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to squat and to press until the anus is open and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or whatever you have those with your nail, and then cut those by their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those by the humidity of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with wool fleece, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and pulverize on them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are applied to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey egressio, then christenize the patient with a cristeri in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and that obeys egressio slightly when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your nail, or whatever you take those with a hook, and cut those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this manner: take thread enveloped and introduce that into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelop the two ends of the thread in the part further from the needle, and it is laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then cut the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of those untied, so that the superfluity of blood runs from that one.
And then place on the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it closes; and when it is closed, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
And as they are old and no longer work in that medicine, then you must cut those with the point of a spatum or with your nail until they are made moist and the pus of those is extracted, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must remove those with a sharp pus vehemently that the first one until it bleeds and is excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that almesamir, it is called, and it is not if not a red knot according to the color of the body resembling a head of a clavicle, and it is made in all the body and most in the parts below the feet and in the fingers, and it must be due to those pains the ailment.
And therefore, whoever it is incised that which is in the circuit of the claw, and it is held with the forceps or with a hook, and it is eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is preceded in its chapter.
More than a wart is a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and many times they appear on the hands of children.
And the cure for it is that you extend and cut into it, or that you tighten it with a thread or by sewing it up. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
But a nettle is a small, fetid or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body that goes into the skin, and when the sting finds it, it is felt in it like a bite of a nettle, and it is made around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a feather quill of eagle or of vulture, and it be strong, and place that over the nettle inside while containing the circle of the quill with the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the quill inside while cutting that which is in the circuit of the nettle, and place that in the skin of the flesh, and that you eradicate the nettle from its root.
And if you wish, do it with a quill of iron or of steel according to this form:
Let the part above the quill be drawn to a subtlety, blunt (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that over the said one the apprehension of it be abviated and the revolution of it.
And if you wish, cauterize the nettle according to what is said before in the cauterization of a boil in the chapter of cauterization.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christenings are made of silver or of lead or of iron melted or hammered; and sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those to which they are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of the little children be small; and of those whose hips are sore or painful, the christenings of those be small.
The form of a large and few christening:
The head of the quill of it above in which the pouch is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it the distinction the one in which the pouch is tied thus as times.
And the extremity of it further down, the one which is inserted into the anus, be blunt (so it is not open) much lion, drawn to a subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and in the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker one a little.
And be the pouch in which be placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of cru thread which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with it the pouch; and when it is placed in it the pouch, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinct ones with strong constriction, and then cauterize with it each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with it is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, which be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be laid on his back, and elevate his legs up and place beneath him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or with album of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the pouch and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that as an easement, have it as much as it can; and if sleep with it for a whole night, it is more beneficial in recovery.
But if you cauterize that in the diseases of solution of belly and the easement of it the cure, then you iterate the cauterizer until it be healed.
And if in the anus be hemorrhoids or abscesses leading, then be the christening much subtle and lion, of the christenings with which the children are christened.
Of the cure of the plagues.
I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was convenient to the book, and I say thus the cure of those with my and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what in which they are made the plagues and according to the place upon which befall the plagues.
And the causes for which many times are made the plagues are as such as a wound of spear, or incision of sword or of axe, or percussion with lance, or with clubs, or with arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the places of the body are as such as a plague which befalls upon the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some diseases so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other diseases.
And I will begin with the diseases of the head, for the remembrance of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple disease occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow or a similar injury, and the vein has been squeezed so much that it is a large wound and you fear that the patient may have an abscess, then you should immediately take care and perform a cephalic phlebotomy, and do not delay this; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue, if no other cause prevents phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the wound is little.
And it should be phlebotomy on the opposite side of the diseased area; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy foods.
But if any cause prohibits phlebotomy, then lessen the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And place on the wound, if a boil occurs, a poultice infused in rose oil or in wine in which is stippled.
But if it is certain that a boil will occur, then place on the wound, if it is recent, its own blood and the air has not yet changed that powder which I will recount shortly.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on it an ointment until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or is from a deep cut and the lips of it are not adjusted with pins, then adjust those with suture according to what I will recount of the suturing of them.
But if the wound is already uncovered of the bone and tendon, and there is no retention of it but a small suspension, then incise that and then treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in the place of the vein, and command the patient to be sparing of foods in which there is grease: caps and forms cooked and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if a putrefaction occurs in the vein and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that pus and cast it out, and then treat that.
But if in these wounds the artery or vein from which blood can flow is involved, and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or cauterize it; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize it until the blood is severed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way that you pulverize on them this powder, which consolidated before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: receive olive oil, one part, dragon's blood, two parts, and cauterized earth, three parts; all be ground and sifted, and of this fill the wound, and be constrained by good constriction until it well adheres on it, and be coagulated with the blood.
And then strengthens that with pins and loosens it, and do not untie it while it is thus that it is not suppurated, for it is not eradicated from it the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes you do this alone cauterization, when you do not have in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already you do this same operation in the great wounds when it convenes that it be placed on them and be tightened, and wounds recent with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but then treat those with what we have said, in this way that you place on them some digested ointments, or that you place on them powder of barley flour with water and honey until they obtain a poultice; and then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if a fracture occurs with the wound in bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a tool.
And I will say the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if already the nerve of the neck is incised or the artery, then if it is the nerve, it is not in it to be cured but that its cure be avoided with what makes vehement astringency, such as ziniar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to them for that it is noxious to the nerves and contracts it. And do not place on the wound any cause of all cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most delicate of all the members.
And if it is cured with medicines lighter, such as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in rose or un-rose oil, and then when it is washed with sweet water and the other smaller herbs according to this manner, and humid ointments.
But if the plague is large, then administer suture, or shorten the lips of it, and then care for it with powders until it is healed.
But if the plague is deep or an accident occurs in it at the lower part of the wound, then perforate it at the most depressed location.
But if in the plague an artery has already been incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
But if the spinal cord of the neck or all of it has already been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with suture over the canal of the neck and do not touch it; raise it and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent structure, and leave it for a few days; and then care for it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation until it is healed.
But if the plague has already been made in the bone, then strike it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can of them; and what you cannot remove, leave it until the plague is softened, and it is separated, and the discharge from it is relieved.
And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle on it the powder which has been recommended to you. But if a fistula has been made in the plague, then cure it with the water of which the memory will come in its chapter.
If it is a percussion with a lance or with a chisel, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the plague there is windiness when the patient is leaning; then you know that the plague is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the plague is recent with its blood, then you place on it in the first hour powder, and do not strengthen it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient, but place on it attractive ointment, and loosen it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you place in the orifice of the plague a piece of old cloth so that it sucks up what there is of the humidities; and make the patient lie on the plague so that what is in it runs out.
But if three days or more have passed from the plague and the patient does not suffer spasms or tremors of the heart, nor constriction of the throat, and sometimes the other good dispositions of him, then you know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all the time it is open, then you know that a fistula has already been made; therefore cure it according to its chapter.
And if the plague is by incision of a spaza or chisel, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with the water that precedes suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if a fracture has already been made in the bone, and already from it bones have been incised, then you turn the plague and try to extract those bones, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the plague softens, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other plagues accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of water that we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or medium.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and if you see that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not try the introduction of them to their place as soon as possible, because it opens and becomes thickened for which the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned before.
And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that convenience in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate to the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and there is issued some cause from the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then water is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflammation by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then when you scalf that as you would immerse a sponge or cloth damp in water tepid alone, or which you squeeze in water with squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embrokes with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is made with this liquid, which has a coagulating property, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
And therefore, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which are boiled other and worse herbs, because by this it is relieved the discomfort of it with little cause.
But if the discomfort of it is excused with this cure, then you dissect the disruption a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is owned that it is not a section, and that there is no occupation to dry it up according to need and weakness.
Of the instrument, this is the shape of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and not as subtle as a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
And therefore, when the plague is amplified and the intestine is brought out, then cover that its reduction be according to the form of it natural, in its proper place, if it is possible above that, because it is better.
But when the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then cover that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you place the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and your consideration always in that way so that the part in which the plague is is higher than the other.
And thus cover that you administer this in large plagues and in medium plagues.
And in small plagues, place that which is to your preparation, and then make it be ministered between your fingers, which has the disruption entirely with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which if the suture causes any other reason.
And this is the way of common suturing: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then lays it from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthens the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the  ciph that is below the cord of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciph, and they are made four orders.
And then strengthen with thread double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the plague by decent addition; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in it, and then tie it with thread as if it were tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire constriction of the plague.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety, because the subtle needles lightly incised the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter in the cord, and therefore for that reason, let them be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not cover that the needle be put in two extremities of the cord properly not, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the plague swells before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in suturing so that the plague is not hindered from consolidation.
And then incise the extremities of the needles so that they do not scratch the patient's skin; and place on the suture powders expanded of all parts, those which have the extremities of the needles; and leave them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with needles in this manner is most convenient in small plagues, because it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciph, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same part from which you commenced, so that the thread retracts itself from the most superior part of the plague, so that the suturing be according to the suturing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suturing saves the men.
And with this suturing I healed the plague which was afflicted to a man in his belly, which had been plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the plague was greater than a palm, and it was pushed out from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced it after that the bowel had been pierced by the plague for twenty-four hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and I healed him and he is cured; and therefore this viscus for most years, and is converted in his dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle fire, because I did not cure him with that wash, because he was in a place where the wash was not found nor any medicine, but I placed over the plague a hot cloth twice a day and a constant washing with honey water until it healed.
But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Scripture.
And that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the tendon and in that middle laceration according to the straightness and length of the whole body, and leave the extremity of the thread in the place where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the wound.
And therefore, when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the wound from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the thread that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make the penetration with that one with which you make that penetration in the thread in the extremity of the wound which is in the place of it until all that penetrates.
And then begin from this same side and sew with the extremity that is of the thread in the other place, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that tendon and body the extremity of the thread that is in the other side with this extremity of the wound; and extract that one from the tendon which is of that part of it.
And do this once and another, and do this once and another until you sew all that is front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a suture of pellicies with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the thread once from the part of the extremity of the tendon, and that you leave that other one inside until you have completed it.
But the second kind of proper suturing which I call Gualia, and this is of its own and by it recommended, is that you sew it according to similarity with which some medicants sew it, in this way that they join all part to its own part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you recommend to me.
So that you put the needle in the extremity of the wound to your own from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the thread; and then turn the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the thread.
And then turn those each one, and make each one penetrate from the back part into the front part in two extremities of the wound others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common suture lighter, and is the suturing of which I previously mentioned remembrance.
This is the sermo of Gualia
And yet some have said, the suturing of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you insert into these each one a thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle of that which you should, and make that penetration into the other place according to the suturing of those who sew the guts similarly.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of the medication of the plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you know the plague recent with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and fit it properly, then it rests upon that carbuncular powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then it rests upon that some washes which are to your presence until they make a hard crust and the threads are drawn, and the thread and wound are consolidated; and then cure it as is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
But if to you are not present the medicines, then it rests upon that forthwith, because it begins to throw a sweat, hot cloth, and change that two times a day, as to you and I have taught, until it is healed, because you would not need of other medication in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the lesion in the main members, then you must submerge linen lion in olive oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and rest it on the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave them as it is.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his bowels, because many times this must happen, then cauterize it with a black stiptic vi, and most of all if the putrefaction is reached in the bowel and is made exitura penetrating into its concavity.
And know that that which is of the thick bowel is of lighter healing than that which is in the subtle bowels.
And it is a difficult cure because the hernia, which is called “gegunu”, does not receive healing from the plague that falls on it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your recipe with which you reduce the hernias equally.
But if it has passed into the space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with a file on the area that is blackened by it, so that blood flows, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file pendant from the partition left of the plague wound, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it, you must the removal of the cloth and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembering of the plagues when they happen in the hernia.
When a rupture occurs in the hernia and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, because for that I saw one who was plagued in his belly by the thrust of a lance and was the plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and he was free from it and windy.
Therefore, I thought about the cure of it since it was not confident in the healing of it, but I continued to subtly treat it until the wound was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should not undergo any accident of evil in his belly; and do not become anyone for that evil accident and break in their thousand dispositions eating and drinking, and then bathe and exercise in his arms.
And already said some experienced that when a plague occurs in the hernia, and it is small, then it is necessary that it be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take fromigues of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a fromigua of those that has the mouth open on the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes on those and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another formigua near the first, and do not cease this to do with formiguas one near another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce that and close the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the hernia until the hernia is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the hernia be tied with a subtle file which is made of the gut of a beast annexed to it, because it is more in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these gut files, and be it well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a file of linen, enveloped, and then introduce that file into needles and close with it the hernia, and reduce that in the rupture.
And this manner of suture with formiguas is nothing but according to a way of trust and hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle hernias, because then it is not engendered but subtlety, and it is not healed of it altogether.
Of the cure of zechem and fistula.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and throws out pus all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula and we call that azukem.
And a fistula according to truth is a fetid, hard, white nodule, with which there is no pain and to which the concavity is as it is the concavity of the bone of a bird; and for this reason, that is called by some rizatz, that is, bone.
And it is in some men humid, which throws out pus; and very soon the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is moved, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and their signs and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that I make to you know the cure of fistula which is done by way of operation with a knife.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the head, or the intestines, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed by composition so that of the hand and the foot; and those that give to it proximity of the principal member and of semblance.
And therefore of these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and no receive cure, and occupation with that is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach these places that have been said, and you wait and trust in the cure of it, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take the attempt of a probe or of iron, and if the fistula goes according to rectum, and inquire that with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a probe of subtle lead, for lead with the lightness of its body is alleviated and curved of the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrific things, it is not to you possible that you signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice with its orifices, for the moisture by which you cleanse it must go to the other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible to you that you know if here has the bone or the nerve, and is the concavity of the fistula distant or near, or is a fistula to which there are many orifices and this over all with the sum of your strength, with your probing, with which you probe the patient, and the invention of the pain you owe the compression with your hand over the place, and semblance of the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And cum you will have stood over all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and is that you consider then if it is fistula apparent near or in salt place, distant from junction, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have to you and said.
Then you dry the fistula according to that which before is said of the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of theil and of semblance, and cure that within that it be healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is according to rectum, then cove that you incise that in the preon as much as to you will be possible, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this with that some times within that the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the concavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore that with ointments which engender healthy flesh within that it be healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize that according to that we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is due to you to certify that, then you inquire that and dry that according to that we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you cut that within that the corruption be hosted all; and then cure that with that which it encase within that it be healed.
And if it is not healed and gives brac as it did, then you know that you have not come to the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover over it secondarily and exquisitely make the reason of it and the purification of it with the later strong tie, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore to you in that there is engendered only to leave that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to throw that, then you throw it with subtle forceps which are convenient to that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those leave none cause with your strength.
But if to you makes contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in them incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation to take out the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that which you can pierce the plague, and leave that within that it is in the vicinity of those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plague that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section the which you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice submerged in its thrice-soaked with oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green ointments, for when they will soften those ligaments, and the bones are of them separated the ablation, and of those attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only its surface, then remove that with a knife only to the rear until the blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted from it is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that and to cut it entirely into the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure it from within until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his thigh so that you may place that as an example and assistant on your operation.
There is a young man, about thirty years old, who has an accident of pain in his thigh, and from the parts of the middle, the evil is over the matter of the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not from an external cause.
And therefore it is extended for a long time by the error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and there are many materials that come out of it, and its cure is stopped until the thigh is fistulated, and there are made in it many horrifying wounds which all throw out pus and the humors of the body.
And therefore the cure took many years of doctors, and there was no wisdom in them but in the art, until I was called upon.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that flowed from those horrifying wounds for a great course; and already the body of that man was all wasted and the color of him was yellowish.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
And then I explored all the wounds and found that they reached to all parts of the thigh.
And then I took my knife and cut into one of the wounds where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed that which was discovered to me and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and discovered on the bone secondarily to the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sewed that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made a fair cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered on him another time and did not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I cut into it about an inch, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation on him and the cutting of it, but for the disposition of the frailty of him and for the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because it happened to him at all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore he is healed entirely, and nothing is in the place of the bone but hard flesh; and his disposition in his body is made good and returns the virtue of him; and he is converted in his dispositions and did not cause him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body already, then when you cut it according to this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that on the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, because when you do this it is not forbidden that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cover that the sawing on the corrupted place be little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, abase it is the one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in that reason but in the engineering.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, since you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and in this way the corruption is rectified to you, when it does not do you contrariety vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the instruments to cut these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that when you prepare for every kind of operation, the instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which you indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of diseases, for that when you have already by yourself that which is convenient to them of the instruments to every disease.
And you so a you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments the ones which you will place as simple with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient otherwise than with that [the chisel] they be confricadatz the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the mouth wide and large.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another saw decently made:  Let it be made with an arch of it as high as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of boy-knife decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient for the ratio of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of sharp extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
The extremities may be cut either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption going from the member which you do not strike by any cause, then when you cut that member into that which the hon acossec the corruption, so that the patient escapes through that of death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that the fire has already burned it, or it may be brought near the blackness before the pus that one puts into that member that it seizes it and that it nourishes the whole body; and therefore, be careful to cut into that.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption by percussion of some venomous causes as well as from a scorpion of the sea or from a viper or from a rutabaga and similar.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you cut it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may nourish in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you cut the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if another passes the corruption and sometimes it goes around the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause another to that in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption goes around the toe of the foot, then you cut it into one of the knuckles.
And if it takes hold in the arch of the foot, then you cut the whole foot. But if it may go into the thigh, then you cut the leg into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no way but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of cutting or sawing the member is that you tighten the ligament in the part farthest from which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament above the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, and make a flat space until all the flesh is uncovered; and then cut or saw.
And cover that which is placed on all parts so that it does not touch the place, and that it comes to the patient's lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if blood flows when working, then cauterize the place carefully, or place some powders on it that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication while it is being completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recount to you what happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have recounted to you, which is when blackness occurs in his foot with a burning that was assembled like the burning of fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his toe before it extends to the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself by putting pus that helps the cure to go into the limb with the violence of it that numbs from pain and burning, and the incision in that foot goes into the joint, and fire heals.
For a long time that same corruption occurs in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And then it comes to me, and so I am pierced to repercuss that superfluity with what I place on my hand of medicines, then the purification of the body of him; and the superfluity does not repercuss and begins to go into the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he begs me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping for the repercussion of that superfluity, and more than that, I fear the incision of his hand would be death, for the virtue of the sickness was over taking.
And because he despaired of me, he returned to his land and I came to know that the man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and he healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it may be helpful on what catches of this sickness, and that its meaning by which it is signified and according to which it is acted.
Of the cure of the intestines and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is ejected from it, and the place remains hollow as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is as fine cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and it has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as it is turned, and most importantly when it is fine and made like cloth, and so that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that that corruption has not achieved a further consequence, and in the skin there has passed through from the front, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of a fetid odor, then you clysterize that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and strong wine and cumin receiving equal parts, and they are put into a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that with a spoon; and do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of beech, and put water on it; and then you strain that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the patient has no tolerance on the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then clysterize that with water and honey and a little crushed cumin, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize that with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of enguent dyaphinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize with it some medicines and other enguents that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of enguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and put in it gauze wrapped in Egyptian enguent or basilicon enguent until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave it in the quantity in which between the clyster there is addition.
And if the patient's orifice from which the arm comes out is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the arm runs inside, because when the arm is compressed in the prepondency of the sinew the flesh is engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew inside the environment of the bone as low as you want, then pierce it so that you prepare the limb with the preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is fitted to you and that no cause of the arm is retained in it.
But that which is over the orifice of the sinew, which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what runs from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown over the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or approximates adherence, then the most you untie it on the third day, and when you untie the bandage, then change the cloth for another and renew the rinsing.
But if from the sinew a little space goes virus subtle, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of it approximates, because so in some men in which a slow generation of flesh in the wounds, and of those so in which is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinew after many days is issued arm indigested, then know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and is the cause prolonged, then you adjust in exsiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as in rinsing day-finicon, when in it is adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the most latter is the one which is cured, is that you take of rinsing day-finicon and be dissolved in rose oil, and be on it poured vi antic in its substance, and then mix that with it, and use of that.
And already seems in that action, when there is no arm, rinsing day-finicon, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloen and incense, and grind all and pulverize over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it with water over cloth and stretch that over the sinew; and line it with the honey the one which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize over cloth and stretch that.
And sometimes are administered with it aristolochia long and roots of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of errs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust, grind those and sieve and pulverize over the honey the one which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or to the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panari and nails rubbed and incision of the finger added and section.
Panari is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and often arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or is an abscess of abscess caut, or is corrupted, and throws out arm until it corrodes the root of the nail, and often corrupts that whole, and often pervades its corruption to the bone until it is a fetid odor, and is made the extremity of the finger lad, and the color of it is made dusky.
And therefore when you will have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not mix your cure, then cover that you cut with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, because cauterization much is helpful in that.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail void already comprehend the flesh to the parts of the finger, and they begin to sting it and leave it that, then cover that you place a fine ray under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and impel it up and cut it with facility, and place over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines comburent corrosive until it be all removed; and then cure it with rinsing until it be healed.
But if the corruption already presses in the bone, then cover that you cut the bone that and extract it, for no time is healed that there is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed its memory, and then care for it while it is healing.
If the nail is injured by a blow or friction, and there is pain in that area, then when you first begin to treat the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse cut from top to bottom, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh that is left under the nail, because you will cause the patient to have very strong pain, and it will cause the birth of excess flesh in the area; and then care for the area with water that soothes the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very strong in the flesh, and very strong in the bones, or very strong in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the fingers. But that one that is born in some of the fingers of the hand does not harm, and this one that is born in the joints is very harmful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that is that you cut it, following its root with a broad spatula.
But that one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
But that one that is born in the finger, when you first begin to cut the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws convenient for water, and then care for it while it is healing.
But consolidation, which happens to the fingers between their movements or by birth of the man who is born in this way, or by the consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then you must cut that consolidation while the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between their cloths of the bandages in oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a lamina of thin lead while it is consolidated as it should.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins wrapped thick and full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the major advent of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the itinerants and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, you must administer purging of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it is incised and that black blood is thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: at the beginning, embroil the leg with lukewarm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the thigh, and to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg up, and down, until the quantity of blood that you want and that seems to suffice is extracted, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then tie that, and command him that he abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And iterate the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with lukewarm water until it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present to you, until the limb be scalded.
And then cut the vein in the right of it by incision in the long or in the back of it of the knee, or in the lowest of it of the ankle.
And then open the vein with pincers and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and is the appearance of it that sometimes that rogue declining to blackness.
And therefore, when you evacuate and from the vein, you sometimes see that white which is cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it is elevated and thrown from the vein, and suspend that with a lion's horn or an onion.
And then cut another incision near that one for three fingers, and then scrape the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut that in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is extracted by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above that.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, until all is extracted; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce a double strong needle with thread and tie that, or introduce behind it the ray and turn your hand to every part until it is ejected. And guard yourself that it not be incised; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient by that harm.
And when that whole thing is thrown out, then place on the area of the plague wool soaked in wine and oil rubbed and oil unrubbed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the gut is contracted having tortuosity in which it is wrapped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to that we have said, then cover that which you do on that whole tortuosity of it and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks until you elevate that whole.
And guard yourself that your section does not cut the vein and that you do not plague that, for difficult it is for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with which the gut is cut:
It is not to it accuitated thus as the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity for that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having is in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little humidity and in which there are no herbs nor aybre.
And it is strongly generated in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom descended from the serpent's body and worms and scarabs and worms engendering between the bone and the flesh.
And sign of the acceptance of the coming of it is of this vein that accidies in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then the vein issir from the place of that vesication which seems razit of plant.
And therefore, when the extremity appears, then cover that with a piece of lead weighing one ounce, between two ounces, and tie it, letting the lead hang from the leg.
And as many times as you see of it any cause to the parts outside, cover that in lead and bind that. And if the part is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and envelop the remnant; and do not incise that of razit until it is outside, for if you incise that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes happen abscess and poyredura in the place and bad ulceration.
Because it must be treated gradually and be extracted little by little, until it is thrown out from the end of it and no remnant of it remains in the body.
And of this vein is issued in some men that is in its length of v palms and ten and already has reached me that it is issued one of xx palms.
And if it is incised at the hour of its medication, then introduce the ray into the track of it and perforate that with long track with the body, until it is evacuated all that is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that for the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from some orifice ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with what is said below.
Of section above worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine ailment.
This ailment is named in some lands because it often happens to oxen and is a worm few one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its advancement from member to member until it disrupts the bone and is seen outside.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if it were worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and has reached the brain, then very much it grieves in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this often happens.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then you must strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then dry over it and extract that.
And if it is planted in the flesh and not the other, then you place cauterization with fire over the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
And if you see that being reached to the head near the brain, then strengthen over the forehead with a strong constriction, and then dry over it, and extract that; and make the patient use of modification of his body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods generating putrefaction.
Of the section above the ailment.
This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes in certain limbs, and then it is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and because it was removed for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was climbing, but more lightly than being carried, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it went to the pain of that place and settled in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that I should turn it over all over her body as I had seen; and it was too marvelous of the mutation of it and the velocity of limb to limb. And I had already seen this before in my own veins in that manner, however, I have seen many who felt pain being changed from limb to limb. But I did not see this in the veins as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be otherwise than that because the woman was old, on so of dry body and of uncovered veins, and in this appearance felt that windiness mutated.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with humid bodies of well-closed veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the vein as we have said, then you strengthen over that and leave it lightly and secse over that until that windiness is contracted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your veins, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with that which you expel windiness, and charm them with pills foul and with pills of serapi and similar.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they are shot, for their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the neck is when it hits in it an arrow, and passes through the bone, and it is issued from the cyph, which is above the brain, for it is violently shaken, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rumble in the legs, and inflammation and rumble of the tongue, and spasm and mixing of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very much is cut off the word and destroyed the voice, and it is issued from the place of the plague white humidity resembling powder, and eyes of it resembling the fluidity of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels with that which it is stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very much the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the hand, and running of the plague black blood, and it seizes that coldness of the extremities, and a sore cold, and syncope; and therefore know that death descends upon it all at once.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung, so are the spitting of phlegm of blood from the plague, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and he exhales great spirit, and demands the extraction of cold air.
And if it hits the arrow in the ligament which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small of the back, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sigh, and it is not bad all the limbs of the muscles.
And if it hits the arrow in the stomach, then very much the eyes of the plague are seen with some indigested food.
And if it hits the arrow in the belly, and it is stuck in it, eyes some wound of the plague, or the web, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and it is issued from it urine, and it processes from it some cause to the parts outside, and very much is pain upon the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
May the other members, as well as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and assistants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the thigh, and the leg, and their likeness of the limbs, be saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of the being of these arrows, so that you may signify by this about your cure.
The cause is, that in a man shot an arrow in the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted that from the other side, leaving the gray of the auricle of his ear, and it is healed, and it did not cause harm in the eye of his.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and it was not obtained from that except a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's iron in which there were no auriculas.
And the Jew healed, and it did not cause harm in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has auriculas; and therefore I incised upon that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the throat of him; and therefore I subtiliated with that, and then I extracted that, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought that he would die from that; and therefore, since forty days had passed and there was no change in him from his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and engineered upon that, and he healed, and it did not cause harm to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot in his back, and the plague was consolidated upon him, and since it had been about seven years, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her belly, and the plague was consolidated from within her, and it was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the plague was consolidated, and it broke the arrow, not finding much pain here, and many appearances like this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the prince of the king who was shot in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to the cure of him shortly after the shooting of the arrow, within three days.
And therefore I felt the plague of the arrow very strictly; and then I inquired about that with a subtle attempt, and I did not feel that; but I felt it prick below the right auricle, and therefore I suspected that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster in which is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place should be apostumed so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it may succeed upon that.
And it did not cause harm in the place, signifying that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days and it did not cause harm; and the plague was consolidated meanwhile, and it broke the patient of the extraction of him for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recounted this to me.
And therefore I placed upon the plague medicine acute corrosive for many days until it was open, and with the probe I felt that, and I felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted it in the appearance of the plague by that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I passed time with that for the space of time within four months.
And then, since the plague was amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and to remove that, and not to be obstructed by it, then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously work upon that with manners of ingenuity, until one day I began upon that with manners of ingenious hanging, according to how it will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted that; and then I restored that plague.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the plague was consolidated, and the patient healed for whole health, and it did not harm him in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended with narration nor do those comprehend the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with that which is present about that which is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument by the descent of the extraneous causes of the art when it occurs.
And therefore I say that arrows are not thrown out of the members in which they are lodged but according to two manners: either by traction of the place in which it enters; or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is thrown by the place where it has entered, or is an arrow coming from the fleshy place, and is thrown and thrown out.
And if you do not obey the commandment of the hour in which you catch it, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it can heal, and the traction of it and its exit are relieved.
And similarly if it is stuck in bones and you do not obey the commandment, then leave that for some days and repeat that with traction and movement every day, and it is thrown out.
And if you do not obey the commandment aprop some days, then you must pierce in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of all parts with a subtle drill until the place of the arrow is amplified, and then extract that.
But if the arrow is already embedded in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire that with a probe, and if you feel that, then throw that with some instruments which are convenient for the traction of it.
And if you cannot upon it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here is no bone nor nerves nor vein, then you fen upon the plague until it is amplified and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if so to the ears which are held, then you deliura the flesh in which it is stuck of all parts with all the ingenuity that you can do; and engineer upon that, if you cannot upon the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those until you obey.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with torsion of your hand with forceps at all parts until it makes that obey; and subtilia with subtle subtlety that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult traction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot upon that of your hour, then you leave for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can heal, and then repeat that for when it is relieved. But if to you makes contrariety flux of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingenuity in all manner a way to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I and to you have recommended.
And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you must the placement of the arrow in it, for it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible per the figures.
But the arrows that are thrown out by the contrary of the other part, or that already from it proceeds any part to the parts of outside, or makes difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and times that eminent; therefore you dissect upon that; and be the dissection according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then throw that, for it is made lighter to commandment.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you tortz the lame according to contrariety until the arrow compresses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for some days, and then repeat that until it is possible.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel that with it.
But if the shaft is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel that with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel that with a strong instrument entering into that, for the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then you must concave all the flesh in which is the very, if it is to you possible that, and then cure that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is proximate so that you touch that with the probe, and it is to you possible to dissect upon that, then dissect upon that and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and then close the wound if it is indigents, and cure that until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which the arrows are pulled.
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak that are made like a saw when they grip the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these many kinds are made, large, few and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
As if a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize .xxx., of which are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsatile veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two heels that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; Because of those one is cephalic, and it is the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deaf, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and that one the people call "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and they call that one the vulgarians "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed on the focil, and it is that one in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that one that appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and the place of it is below the leg of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is below the leg of the wild latz; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The use of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and emigranea and sahafati and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be scraped the head of the patient, and be rubbed the head of the patient in the occiput in the place of both the veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient their neck with a bandage until the two appear and the places of them near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and touch that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the attempt.
Then you take the sharp lance, and that is the one that is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you elevate your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it as much blood as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has been preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the use of phlebotomy is for ancient emigranea and sode evil and assiduous ophthalmia and courses of acute effusions of superfluity to the heels.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck tightly until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and the pulse of them below your finger is demonstrated; and then you shall attempt.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your indicated finger, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place on that coat and poultices and tighten that upwards with strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already is preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the use of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is as close as the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the old ailments of the face and to emigranea and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to what I recommend to you; so that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, the shape of which is:
Pause the point which is at the head of the lancet over that vein and strike upon it with a pen or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the puncture of the patient and tighten that one until it is healed.
And some times it is opened with a lancet, but however the lancet should not be of acute extremity as the other lancets, rather it should be of blunt extremity, and phlebotomize that one according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong that it would break it in it the lancet when it is subtle.
But the usefulness of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of the two wrists for scabies of the wrists and for rheum and sebum in the wrists, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those ones, and you if you are standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse in longitude a little with phlebotomy little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the lancet is subtle, very likely the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those ones, and tighten those ones for a night, and then untie those ones.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the diseases of the face and migraine and rheum that happens in the face, and mostly when it is ancient.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet subtle long and place that one in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you end your hand with the lancet little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that one for a night, because that one is restored lightly.
But the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the two guidegui is to constriction of ale and to beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad ulcers corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those ones is that the patient tightens himself each one in his neck with a bandage; and be the artificers over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
And then phlebotomize the vein at the long with lancet ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to tempered quantity or according to what times of necessity that is to what; and then make semblant of the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and tighten the two veins with a middle constriction so that the patient not be provoked, and let it until the morning when the plague is healed.
And the usefulness of the phlebotomy of the veins algerich, confers to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those ones is that you make  the patient stand in front of you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then roll up his lips and regard the two veins of which one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this is more because in the circuit of those there are small black veins; and therefore incise each one by incision.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand to incision of the major of those ones, and of the pus more manifest of those ones.
And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the usefulness is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to provocations that are in the throat, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those ones is that follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, of the one side of it vein and of the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing those ones, because below those ones are arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those that run custom in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the lancet myrtle or olive to subtlety declining; or cut with lancet cutellar, and call it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the latz of it be so as sometimes, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full that appear thick, and to those that contain thick blood clotted.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to phlebotomize of subtle veins that contain subtle blood citrine.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilica vein which is one of three veins: that extracts the blood of the illnesses that are left the throat and the neck, and from that which seizes the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, to guard well that and to be over-fear in that, for beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and there will occur a flux of blood, so that cove that in the phlebotomies that with phlebotomy pungent, be it sectant with incision.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then cove that you leave that and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that phlebotomize in the place of it end of the arm, for that is manifest; and secsa that with phlebotomy incision as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of it metyssa, then cove before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place within that you know the place of the wrists, and then lean over it with a hand; and then lay the arm and secsa the vein with concave incision with phlebotomy incision as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as strengthens the ligament, inflation in the place that you have senhat with a hand, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore squiva that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as such as of a child, and the blood is subtle rogue, then you know that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you coyta and place your hand over that for a long space; and then oppose your hand, and if the blood is abscindit, for many times it is abscindit, then you strengthen the arm and layssa that.
And guard the patient from the moccio of it, and be over-fear of it and no maugua that for some days until it is sanat.
But if the blood is not abscindit, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then you inscideys the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contrayta, and it is abscindit the blood; or that you take scorsa of fistic, and fen that, and take the one maytat and strengthen that over the place of the vein at strictura descent am liament and at pulvils within the other day.
And then if the blood is abscindit, bo es; and if not, then cure that with that of which it is preceded to the rememoracio of the place of the polveras abscindentz flux of blood.
And the abscision of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the vena fusca the phlebotomy is a benefit that extracts the blood of the superior part of the head and to the part below the body; for that because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of cephalica, as we have said.
And cove to the phlebotomist that it be over-fear in the phlebotomy of it, for beneath that there is a nerve; and therefore if it adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will occur to it stupor, and it is difficult the sanacio of it, and fort leu no is sanat of all, And this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and is not shown, then cove that you pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with incision of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you fen the vein in the longitut.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and confers to the illnesses of the heels.
And cove in this properly, if you want that the phlebotomy pungen with phlebotomy olivar or with phlebotomy mirti; for it is the most safe of all the veins, for it is not below it artery nor nerve.
But however fort leu is apostemat in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not not to it in re that apostema.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and in the hope of it and the precaution of the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, that is: cephalic, basilic and median cubital; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of repletion.
And it should be done phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that three hours have passed from the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, or at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And that a child should not be phlebotomized before he has fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month into the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And as if someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's clyster, if there is a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not throw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And they should not be phlebotomized the patients nauseous, certain and crapulent, nor those suffering from illness or intoxication until it is removed from them, nor from dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, near vomiting, near the body of the belly, and near the multiplication of copulation and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and of every cause that dissolves the virtue, either corporal or animal.
And before it, consider in the subtilization of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And before it, enter in bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by some exercise so that the blood is subtiliated.
And pause the phlebotomy of it in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And pierce that the foot of that be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as is labor and superfluous pain and copulation and similarities to them.
And to his bed, make it present the causes in the use of which custom of men am aromaticity and odor and am bals and similarities to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist upon a cushion that is pus than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
And before it, extract his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and before it, strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap that two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for the stricture when it is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is with mollification, and then it prohibits the body of blood emission.
And before the stricture, it is necessary that he who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together at the same time while the veins are inflated, and are declared to the feeling.
And before the phlebotomist, anoint his phlebotomy with a little oil antic properly; and before it, place his left hand's index finger upon that vein, below the place of which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein be a little inflated, and the percussion be seated for that of the veins is the one that is atrobas as if the heart fled, and of those is that is full of ventosity and when you place the phlebotomy upon it, it is contracted, and is discovered the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is strait.
And therefore, for this, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And before the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one time, then it is good; and if not, then you iterate it another time below that place a little, or upon it with festinacio, if the place is not apostemat.
And if the place is apostemat, or the patient fears, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, for it will strongly pull the apostema caut, nor enter into bath.
And before it, iterate the phlebotomy if the need.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the opening a little, and do it with festinacio before the place is apostemat, for the place is apostemat in most men with little opening.
But if you see that already apostemat, then you do not iterate upon it, for it excuses you no cause; and pause upon it any part of the wound of oil, for it alleviates the body of blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer a fenestration of oil in all phlebotomies, with which phlebotomies are performed on the veins, the prohibition of the body of blood, and they do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the place, because the blood is subtiliated and is revolted when it is thick.
And if in the place of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many times accidents occur, and mostly to those who have not been bled except that time, or at the opening of the vein little, and then you cover it, and place on the place a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that it does this near the extraction of blood from that vein with the complement of it or of another vein.
And if in the place for some days any blackness or greenness remains, do not notice it; and if you want, place on it some cause of aloen and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calament or similar to it.
And many times accidents occur abscesses and elevations due to phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness due to your compression over it, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore guard yourself that you place on it any cause of that which they have said, because it will flow strongly from the artery of blood.
And make a poultice with water in which it is stipulated, so that the place may be endured, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color of the blood, which appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is ropy; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtiliated; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in that one who is frail, let the contrary of that be done, and cover that you extract that in troops of times, and that the tract be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary to occur syncope due to phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of millegrains or of simple oxymel scalded; and extract at the one of the blood in three times or four.
And if it is a cold constitution, then prepare before the phlebotomy pa infused in essence of myrrh or in essence of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in essence aromatized and much fragrant.
And if syncope occurs due to phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of much blood, then cover that you prepare to drink water of meat and essence much fragrant subtle; and use of aromaticity with some fennel, and be the his feet with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to even out his arm and dissolve his blood according to time, cover that to him of whom the phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
May who wants to even out his arm, and get rid of his blood according to the second time, and his body is strong, then do so about seven hours or nine of the first phlebotomy.
May who wants to draw the blood from his body to the contrary of the part to which it declines, cover that it be evened out on the second day or the third.
May that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be drawn from it blood in one time and be of it thrown a great quantity and be amplified the opening until syncope occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of him of the blood, so that it does not end up dead in the place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not cover when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since already be closed the orifice of the vein and be made difficult the emission of the blood, that you press upon it with vehemence and curved be extended slightly, because that is too bad.
Have that let it flow until it be phlebotomized secondarily; or remove that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place upon it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress that with a light compression until the blood be out.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is subsided.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood according to the method, and there is no excuse, then you should bleed that person either in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "brachial vein" is flebitized in the place of the basilica or the cephalic, when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of that one is that the patient inserts his hand into warm water until the skin reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then tie a stricture bandage around that limb; and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse small section, not longitudinally or according to the length.
And be the opening wide and be your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in the warm water and leave the blood to run in the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in the warm water, and the vessel is placed the body of blood in warm water in times of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it leaves no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is beneficial for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of that one is that you tie the hand with a bandage or with your own hand, because you have placed it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the eye; and then phlebotomize that transversely; and if it incides that of all no it will not hurt it.
And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because from there are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then iterate the hand in the warm water and let the blood run in that, because if you do not iterate that in the warm water, the blood sires coagulated in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And as it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you place upon the vein oil and salt, so that it not be coagulated tightly; and similarly cove that you do in all strait vein.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is beneficial for the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of that one as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein of the phlebotomy is to the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the womb, and the retention of menstruation, and to the diseases of the lungs and ulcers of the thighs and arms old, and to their likeness of the diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of that one is that the patient inserts their foot into warm water and makes friction upon that until the veins appear well; and lay upon the joint of the foot a bandage; and the place of the vein the talon appears to the finger, and from that are its ramifications in the surface of the foot motz ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest ram or below the calf to the talon, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that one in the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that upon the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize by the traverse, as if you wished to incis it.
And be the phlebotomy vigorous.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of that one in the warm water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the phlebotomy in a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear of it malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the left side.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of that one is to the pain of the hip when it is by blood caut.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of that one is that the patient enters into a bath, and fastens and strains the thigh of that one from the side of the wide up under the heel under four fingers in a long and subtle bandage, so that it appears not by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that one according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incis that one by incision or secces that one by section, because the place of that one is safe.
And it is in most men most amiable; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of that one, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot in place of the auricular and the annular.
And be careful of the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you want.
Then loosen the stricture and place it on the location of the phlebotomy, and tighten the area, slightly so it heals.
Of ventosa and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas are of horns, or of iron, or of lead.
And ventosa is made in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosa without scarification.
And this ventosa that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the ventosa that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations of the body, of which one in which ventosa are placed is the occiput, and it is the rear part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and ventosa of the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and ventosa of the two shoulder blades; and ventosa of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the rib; and ventosa of the two armpits; and ventosa of the two groins.
And ventosa does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue by those, as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor is it advisable that ventosa be made with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventosa for disease or for continuous, administer it at all times at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time that it is.
And therefore when times in any of those causes, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventosa to be made more than it is passed from the day of two or three hours.
And the benefit of ventosa of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and ad that which is poured into the eyes; but it is advisable that that be after evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventosa is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that one that is of frega complexion, or in the one that is catarr, for it gives to that great damage.
And therefore it is not advisable to use it for the elderly, and in those whose heads are of cold diseases.
But to him that over that is continuing over it is made oblivion; and therefore it is advisable that you command the ventosa to pause his hand a little with the ventosa to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventosa of alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and therefore confers to asthma, and to the constriction of ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is advisable that the ventosa alkehel be pulled a little, for if it is paused below, it engenders weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventosa of alhagdahan confers to the pains accidental in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is advisable that you command the ventosa to not press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and occur fluxes of blood.
And ventosa below the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and appearances to them of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stand in the location of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the ventosa that is made over the two shoulder blades confers to caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the ventosa of the two parts of the armpits confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, for that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins slender of the other veins more gross until that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventosa to not process too much in scarification, for the location is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventosa with which is ventosa over the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers further below.
And tell the ventilator to make a large vent, and that it be of copper, because the place needs a strong incision; and very fine, subtle ventilators are to be drawn, and it be scarified with a scarification.
But smaller ventilators on the legs are made with less incision, because they draw blood from the whole body, and they resemble old pains of the lungs and the womb, and the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and resemble both pain and labor; and they are in place of phlebotomy of two veins, and they cut, and of two veins.
But some weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And of the ventilators, the cure is proper to the cure of the ventilators of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the ventilators is that you place the ventilator at the beginning open and draw it by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventilators, but place them lightly, and move them carefully, and that the humors come to the place by equal arrival. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already red and inflamed and that the color of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you should scarify him once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you should scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtilization is opened to the blood and its fluidity. But in the second, to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then the third scarification should be made so that the last is achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices us.
And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we knew that the blood was thick, then we should scarify with a pre-existing scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision, only.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the ventilators should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, like olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violets, or olive oil of two almonds, or olive oil of fig; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or of the same kind.
And if the superfluity is thick, greasy, then the oil should be of marigold, or balm oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and to those likenesses.
But if the ventilator has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and that those places of the ventilators near their application should be washed with water or with cold water of salvia, or with fig water, or with water of bladderwort, and likenesses to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, washes their ventilators with strong wine, or with myrtle and sumac water and likenesses to those.
And of that one whose superfluities are thick, washes their ventilators with old wine, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or of chamomile, and to those likenesses.
And that the ventilation should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and that one should sleep near the ventilation.
What is necessary to regulate the ventilator before phlebotomy.
You should consider at the beginning: then if the ventilator or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and windy, and has acute blood and inflammation, then you should prepare cooling causes, such as vinegar, endive with strong wine and lettuce, and secanabin, and syrup, and to those likenesses.
And pause their meals as much as possible, and meats of tame birds, and foods seasoned with acids, and to those likenesses.
And of that one whose complexion is greasy, he should be encouraged to drink syrup of althea, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and strong-smelling wine between veal and lamb; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of his little and canary and sparrows and small birds and doves.
And that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that some men should be given to drink in certain hours, tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, which is muscade, or alcelita before ventilation or phlebotomy, or near, so that the main limbs be comforted and the blood be subtiliated; and they should not take that scalfatz.
But the wounds that are made by scarification should be wounds that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and on the tip of the belly button, because these members do not tolerate scarification on themselves.
And it is not desired for those [wounds], but rather the attraction of blood from the member, just as we place a leech on the nipple in a disease of blood flow from the nose; and we use that so that the cold, viscous air from the member may be dissolved, just as we place it on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and warms it and removes the pain because it resolves the air.
And it is already placed on the boils when they occur in their opening or the pus, because by virtue of the strong attraction, the pus is drawn out and the boil is eradicated from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen, drawing out the air that is enclosed in those places.
And these wounds are administered empty with suction alone; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of tepid water in the ailments of the spleen.
And this is so that the wound may be filled and be larger, so it is filled with water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for the purpose.
Form of a wound administered with fire: its orifice should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be the majority of a palm; and it should be in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the tract should be small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It should be made of a thick iron or a citron, with large edges, lion, smooth and flat so that it does not damage the member because of its position on it.
And in the middle of it, a transverse bar of iron or steel, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this wound should be larger than the one we have recounted; and the pause smaller than that according to the ailments and the state of the one who uses it.
And the leeches of the infants and the emaciated are others than the leeches of the young and of robust bodies.
And the quality of placing this wound with fire on the member is that it extends the fire with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire is ignited around the remaining part so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the finger should be on the tract that we have said, and when we have the leeches and do not indicate that we show the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that tract, then the wound is immediately dissolved.
And prop the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if you indicated it.
But in a leech that is administered in the ailment of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor tract, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
And this is the form of it: And this leech, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Leeches are not administered in all members, but in those members in which it is not possible to position leeches, because of their small size, such as the tongue and gums and the like; or in members denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their like.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of the ponds of purity.
And then they should be left in the water of the pond until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with leeches; and then the member of the patient should be rubbed until it reddens; and then they should be placed on it.
And how they are filled and case.
And if it is possible to suck the location with a leech, it is more beneficial.
And if not, then wash the location with vinegar and then with a lot of water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the bleeding of the patient is prolonged after the application of the leeches, and that is the result, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it over it until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the bleeding is multiplied, then pulverize over it vitriol trias, or galangal and the like of the causes stiptics, until the bleeding is stopped; or leeches are placed on the location, and they are left until the beans adhere to the location, and the bleeding is stopped.
And therefore, if necessary, iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the location should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be left in the locations until blood escapes; and then they should be placed, because those, when they feel some blood, immediately adhere.
And when you want them to cough, sprinkle a little bit of crushed aloe, or salt, or ash, on those, and then stir it.
Thus begins the prologue of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is of great necessity in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and common folk boast about this chapter, and those who never at any time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you have not forgotten this at any time well; and I have not adopted this that I have learned, but for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until that I extracted the science from those.
And therefore I turn to experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experiments have been conducted; because now I have abridged it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and abridged it at the end of abbreviation; and showed it at the end of declaration; and formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the being of fractures of bones, from those whose preface is necessary before we begin the remembrance of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say that in the prologue of this chapter, the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning are forced the artificers and are stationed upon the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art, others than yourselves.
And therefore I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must, at the beginning, apply yourself to phlebotomy or to leavening that, or whichever one, if no cause prohibits it, as is the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you come across is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content in his food of cold herbs and of fowl meat and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and fill him with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment much and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and cow bellies, and eggs, and fresh birds, and thick meat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the bones that are broken in men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they may be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
But however, nature adjusts and amnesties upon the broken bone from every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that until it is simultaneously conglutinated and tied together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come now with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the other.
Many varieties of fracture within themselves. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their insides; for there is made an arched fracture another that occurs in stars; and sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of their saga and stars and additions proceeding and non-proceeding, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or torment proper in the restoration of them according to what will come remembrance of them distinct in their places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by this is known a bone fracture: it is the twisting of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
However, it is possible that it is a small twist or fissure, and then you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole; however, place over it of the medicines of which remembrance is brought about at that moment the one which convenes to the place; and then be strait by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is curved and not split in two or other such thing that does not happen in it sagacity, as it is remauged whole part of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to rectification of it, however, it must happen to it after a cautery abscess.
And if it happens to it an abscess caut, then leave that for some days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it according to whichever manner that you can of lightness and of ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the healing of it is lighter than of the bone in which the sathagie has happened.
And then strengthen it according to that which will come the remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary extension of this broken limb of two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be the your position with which you pause the limb place engual according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you perforate that you make return those additions with ingenuity and according to whichever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your force that it does not happen to the patient by your operation pain nor lesion; and perforate yourself according to your power that you apply one bone to the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify that and bandage it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such as do foolish doctors that many times make happen abscess caut by their operation, or make happen contraction in the limb as we have seen this by the operation of their many times.
And the quality of the constriction of the limb tranquil is that which I recommend; for that you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as such as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelope be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as such as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelope hard and wide, for the wide bandage connects the great limb and strengthens that of all part with equal constriction, in such a way that in it no macula enters.
And then as you begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause liament convenient to this, over the place of that fracture with three bandages or four according to that the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the liament.
And then come to that at the part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than not to force the constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself with the bandage of the place of the fracture a little, and mollify the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with bandage, and then come to the bandages to the part farther from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the bandage and in the mollification of that according to that we have said in the first bandage above.
And then pause between the bandages of stopa lion or cloth with which be equalized the twisting of the fracture, if in it is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then bandage over these bandages stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause over it that which seats the abscess that and that oste the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And let the bars of the majority of the cane be of a good, well-formed wood; or be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each bar be according to this form and this figure:
However, let the bar that is placed on that fracture be thicker and a little wider than the others, and the length of the bar according to what is seen in the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen on the bars with another bandage according to your first structure; and then tie it below properly according to what we have said of structure, and let it be your structure according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is lengthened, the less the structure.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some fools putting their threads of rope of the flax, and it is a great error, when the bandage is outside equality.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a bandage with those that you want, and let there be at least one finger's width between bar and bar.
And if the patient is said to be suffering at the extremities of the bars near the bandage in those places, then place some wool or carded wool between them so that it does not cause him injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and accidents happen in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that you do not immediately splint every broken limb with bars on the first day; the reason is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed upon bars but rather after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the advent of a boil.
And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients restored, those which were placed upon fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manner of splinting as commonly used for the restoration of a fracture, convenient for many conditions and mostly for women and children, because it is the one about which no heat nor cold comes: and it is that you take of flour powder, and it is the marrow of the flour that depends on the movement of the mill in the sides of the mill.
And make it thus, except that you sift it with albumen of egg, and place the composition of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of it.
Another way to plasters a fracture, dislocation, and sprain: take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all one ounce; of frankincense and aloes one ounce and a half; alochil one ounce and twenty; all be ground and sifted and mixed with boiling water or with egg white if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the bones broken slightly, and confers strength to many men.
Another way to make a plaster which confers to a fracture and sprain: take migrach and white althea root one ounce; of frankincense and aloes one ounce and a half; of acacia six drachmas; of Armenian bol one ounce and twenty.
All be triturated in a mortar with much contrition, and be sifted, and be comfit with water or albumen of egg and be administered.
Manner of splint for joints and separated bones from their places, and if pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool fleece and be immersed in strong wine and boiled oil and be placed upon the place.
More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of boil, and expels pains properly.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and wild poppy leaves; conterey all and make a plaster of them.
A manner of abbreviated plaster administered, it is said to restore the fracture of bone and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: take roots of althea, of chamomile and violet flowers, of barley flour, of each one a part .i.; Be all triturated and be comfit with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then make it with humid coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another manner of plaster stronger in resolution than the first, when accidents happen a hard boil, it is said to restore the member: take roots of althea and seeds of flax, and of balm, and melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one a part i equal; all be triturated and be comfit with water of sage or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the member and the repose of the color of it.
But Ipocras does not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken member for its restoration, but rather made of wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it be medium in thickness and fineness.
It has been observed in Gaul that when a broken limb is placed on a restoration of it and the causes of it are the causes of dryness with a small amount of heat, such as frankincense, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take flour, of chickpeas, of human hair cut or feathers of bird, and of wool, and salt, equally divided; be ground and sifted and be cooked, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remains and when it is untied, is that you consider if it does not happen pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken, no harm of its place, then you do not untie of motz days. And if it happens to the place vehement pain or swelling or inflammation, then you yourself tie or untie that in the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take cloth of linen and sea sponge leon humid, and submerge that in tepid water, and with that wash the place until that swelling and pain is subsided; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it wool cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie over it for a night until you are sure of abscess caut, and that it rests the inflammation of the member, and that the pain of it is remauguda.
And then repeat that stricture subtle and small plaster and do not bind it with your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the fever and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already healed of all, and indigeysses of plaster and of stricture, then you repeat that as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if you do not happen to the member any cause of those that we have said, then you do not untie that but after three days or four or five or seven. And some times all that is left for twenty days according to what appears to you by the unbinding of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the stricture more than in your first stricture all, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded the recollection of it.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and thinner than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to arrive at that; and therefore embroca that with tepid water always that you untie that; and be that in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation run to the member the nourishment, and it is healed lightly.
But that which the foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to what should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, it is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straightener that which enlarged the Ancients in their writings and they were treated with that.
And I have not seen to any of theirs that do that, for it is more reasonable that that should not be done.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for of fractures some is done by percussion of a blow, and the percussion stops all the bone within the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the blow incides any part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision within the back of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or little, and of fracture that is contricio or attrition; and cause of it is percussion with a club or the falling upon a stone, and their semblance.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches the pannicol which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or little.
And of fracture is that which is ammended in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for that reason this species is named fracture capillar.
And is fracture that is done or by falling or by percussion of a stone and its semblance, that makes enter some lamina of the bone to the parts within, and it is done in the place concavity as it happens to the payroles of ram when it happens to their percussion and it is part of their entrance to the parts within.
And mostly this is done in the bodies of wet bones, as if it were the heads of infants.
And to all these species fractures satagias, so are pains as if stars separated. And I will come with recollection of all that in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with tentacles and ostament of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the species capillar is known by that which is discovered upon the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined upon it with tentacle, for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification on the body, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and redness of those, and resemblances to those accidents in the major dispositions, then adopt no cure.
And if you see accidents that are not current, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is that if it has come to you the afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study in the state of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must have the bone studied before the seventh day, because that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and is in small parts and attrition, then you must insert the minced part and rub it, according to that I will tell you.
And it is that you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner as you are able according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light upon the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of blood or abscess caut, then you oppose it with what you have, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and olive oil rubbed, and make the plague rest until the abscess is seated, and you are sure of the blood flow; and then you begin in the circuition of the bone and in the ablation of it.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you insert the bone with a straight inscissori, and this is the form of it: And then administer another inscissori this, a little wider than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer more the inscissori wider than the second.
And it is necessary that you have a number of diverse inscissoris, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the inscissori so that it does not break the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must perforate in the circuit of it before you administer the inscissoris with the drills, which are called non-profundant drills.
And they are not called thus but because those do not pause the term of the bone of the test to that which is near it, because that the drill has a round extremity or margin over that which is left the head of it sharp seeming to margin or to small circle, the which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a great number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone, so that it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve that with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another place, and pause that which is between all trauc the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then insert with inscissoris that which is between each trauc of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on that in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments the which you will have apparelled to it, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the inscissori does not touch any cause of the ciphasc.
And therefore, as you will have circuited the bone perforating, and if it is continued with it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary that you shave and smooth that in the asperity of it of that which is in the bone with other instruments similar to inscissoris, but however, it is necessary that it be more teon and more subtle than the others inscissoris.
And if there remain any particles of the small bones and satagias, then take that with ease with that which is necessary to you of the instruments; and then cure the plague with lichinis and ointments the which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, the which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: Necessary is to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this inscissori lent and merry of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is leon and do not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two latz forward in length, as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the ciphasc with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the incision with a small mallet until the bone is cut with ease as it is turned, and if you are sure of the peritoneum that no accident will happen to it in any way, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Now if any cause is attached to the bone of the peritoneum in some places of the bone, cut that with the tip of the lenticular incision, and deliver that with ease, for it is delivered from its discomfort and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the peritoneum, and what is separated or taken from the bone is its face, and remains in its roughness and subtle stains, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those stains with subtle razors with which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible for you to administer those in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are engaged in your operation of that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your ratio with which razor you remove the bone at the beginning the most blunt of those razors, and then use it closer to the most subtle of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
But in any of the other fractures, small and subtle fractures, when you administer care according to what you pursue for the rectification of it.
And it is a cause that it is not well-versed in all of those who have studied in that art. And stick on what we have written about great fractures.
And if the peritoneum is cut when you eradicate the bone, then when you take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not injure the scalp; and then administer over that bandage lightly, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has alone.
And leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie that and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, such as roots of flax and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and similar to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which is that it abstergesca and does not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in it dirtiness of rinsing or other; nor let virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the peritoneum of the brain, it corrupts that and you can destroy that, and happens to the patient a evil of malignant evil.
And happens in the scalp of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when the care of it is lessened, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious all of it.
And if it does not happen blackness but from the medicine that is placed under it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts three, and in those lines a cloth, and then place that over the scalp; and then cure that with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those sometimes, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then when you introduce the said little one into its nose, and that you align that fracture inside with your said index, and with the said point outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done that by you with ease, and guard yourself that no pain be caused to the patient by that your operation.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then when it is equal to the extremity of the ray in which it is small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And take care of it in the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then about the seventh or tenth of the rest of the abscess caut.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of as much quantity that it fills the channel of the nose.
And I say some of the ancient restorers that the splints be enclosed in border, and be changed every day, but it is not seen to me; have that the piece be enclosed in album of comfit with powder of flour; and then leave the qualgua until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes it is in the nose, in place of a splint, a pain of a boil that is surrounded by a lion's cloth; and if you already have the fracture of the nose very violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do splints.
And if another time a boil occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerot or with a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if no boil occurs, then cover that with a plaster of sesame flour and powdered incense mixed with egg white; and then place a lion's cloth over it, and do not touch the nose with any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then cover those, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for those; and then close the fissure, and cure it with what hardens and consolidates it, and with plasters suitable for it.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then cover it with splints and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a plague, then regard if the fracture is only outwardly, and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its knowledge is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the right index finger; and push with that the inward flexibility of the fracture with ease to the outer parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and with that gently equalize it.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two, then you must administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and then place a cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large thick splint over the cloth; or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie it together according to how the ligation of it is prepared and how the application is suitable, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and put his food in lion's broth.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you untie it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered from it and plaster it with powdered moly, with egg white, or with sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And thus, as it stays annexed and adjusted that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and may that boil be removed.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you subtilize that you remove those splinters with what is suitable for it in the removal of them from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is strait, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomist according to the quantity of your need.
And after you have removed those splinters, and of those there is no boil remaining, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that are suitable for it and harden it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the front part of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated into two parts one of which does not occur splinters; and it is easy to restore it; or it is so that it occurs splinters in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the adjutory and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then engulf the fracture with your fingers until the form of it is made according to what is necessary, and that there is little eminence or concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then place beneath the patient's armpit a support of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the clavicle and hold the support with your hand until you engulf the fracture according to what is necessary.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle outwards, because it has reached the shoulder, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a cushion of medium size on the muscle of their neck.
And the minister presses the muscle of their neck towards the lower parts while the bone of the clavicle is elevated that is in the shoulder, and then you straighten the fracture and enclose it with your hands.
But if you feel splinters of the clavicle and they are bad, then have the patient lie on their back and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this purpose, because you have placed below the clavicle the instrument that serves the forceps; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the shape:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you need it for, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus as sometimes, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plaque which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is certain of abscess caut, then you adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess caut, then you fill the plaque with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the scissura of the plaque.
And if an abscess caut occurs, then you place a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
And all, that the splint not be bad over the broken bone; and for so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the splint already remaugud, then you rectify that and strengthen the ligation.
And then place the sleep of the patient on their neck, and place below the tip of it of their sleep at night a small cushion; so that with that it be elevated the assistant of it from the side of it, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the clavicle to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to the neck of it.
And do not untie the ligation if you do not find in the place proximate or abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it be restored and be coagulated the fracture of the clavicle.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken of it but the margins.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of engine which is to you possible.
And then place on the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then place powder of cloth doubled; and then place over it a sheet of subtle wood according to the quantity of the spatula all or perhaps a little.
But if below the sheet is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you enclose that concavity with linen cloth, and then raise the sheet according to equality.
And then strengthen above with a long humidity with decent constriction and with firmness of the sheet until it not be remaugud from its place.
And consider the ligation every day; and every time that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the sheet if it is remaugud from its place.
And place the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is complete, then you dissolve the ligation, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the broken bone and place the bandage below the hip, then you cut above it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of a suppurating abscess, if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and that is quite bad; but the extremities of it must be moved that they are cicatrized and comminuated.
And of the accidents of it when it is broken in the middle, it is that it declines to the parts of it and it happens to it great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and cough, and great heat and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and it is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be laid the patient on his back, and place between his shoulder blades a cushion; and then press on the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtly in the operation of it and in the equation according to every manner that is to this possible and that convenes to this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it a plaster and cotton and place above the table of a subtle cloth of gauze or of calico and of their likeness in levitat, because you envelop that in cloth; and then subtly in lian that on the broken bone that it not be harmful; and go to the ligation according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with a decent stricture; and then consider the ligation in every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the disgorgement of that you must corrode or puss, or pain, or abscess that happens in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which happens by that in a manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in places gross that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part before it does not happen to those contricio but by that which they are cartilaginous. And cognition of it is not hidden to the feeling, it is the inquiry of it with the said.
And the restoration is thus that you equal the fracture with the said according to the manner possible, until that it be engulfed according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if it be needed of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then it happens to the patient great pain and puncture, as well as puncture that happens to him who has pleureci, and by that which the bones put the veil; and it happens to it difficulty of handling it, and cough, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in that with many ingenious things.
And of theirs it is that they say: whoever places food in the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, because the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelld to the parts outside.
But we would not advise that for that it not be cause lighter to generate abscess caut, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it already helps to that.
And they said some of them that it be placed upon a ventouse and then that it be sucked with force; and it is seeming to reasoning, but however it is feared that the ventouse drives the superfluities to the place by the weakness.
And they said some of them: whoever the place be covered with wool that already is submerged in hot oil, and be placed powders between the back until that it be filled, that it be the ligation equal when it envelops that according to roundness; and then be cured the patient with cure of pleurisy of food and of medicine.
And if a vehement cause constricts the patient which does not suffer, and the bones put the veil with puncture leading, they fear upon the patient, then whoever they cut above the place, uncover of the broken rib, and then place above that instrument that conserve the ciphasc, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they cut the bones with facility, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with sewing, and cure that with plasters until that it be healed.
And if it happens of it abscess, then you cut and put powders in hot oil and place upon the place, and that it be cured the patient with that which cove to the abscess of it.
And be laid on the side upon which he sleeps, until that it be healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it happens fracture to the bones of the neck, and it is quite bad to them, and seeming to the vertebrae of the back. And as that happens to some and you want to know if it heals or no, then consider, because if sometimes its hands already softened and stupefied and dead and not can more those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrict those with your said or prick those with needle and not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the worst dispositions it is mortal.
And if the patient feels constriction with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient recovers with treatment.
And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck the appearance of this and want to know if it is healing or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Then if you see that they are already softened, apply to those those things that are applied to the hands, and as soon as you place them on their back, there will be ventilation and expulsion if it is their will, and sometimes it is reversed on their back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
But if you do not see any cause of those things, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure of him is that you pierce to the seat of the abscess cautery that you place on the affected vertebra rubbed with oil, or with poultices of eggs; place on that some days until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if you see the separation of the bone from the flesh or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover that with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then care for it with some kind of ointment of the intestines, until it is healed.
But if the tailbone of the coccyx is broken, and it is the end of the pelvis, then cover that with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then care for it with some kind of ointment of the intestines, until it is healed.
And if you feel broken splints in it, then cover it, and keep it, and cure the wound with the cure that was preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication in the extremities of them and they are cut in the length and incline to the parts of the sides; and if you see the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it so only, then you align that according to what appears to you by equality align until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that already inclines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared for you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have aligned it, place on it plaster, and then place on it a bandage of splint or of bandage, and strengthen by stricture on which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with what fills that until that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if you see abscess caut, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is cauterized, and place on it what seats it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as you cover.
And if you see in the bone splints or are comminuted, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the adductor.
Adductor is that which is between the hip into the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is one that you take a splint of medium thickness according to this form:
And tie in two extremities two bandages, and then let it be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm over the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the splint.
And then suspend on it some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the parts below; and then the physician and that the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it covers.
And the other way is that the patient be reversed on his neck and suspend the arm of the neck with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below of it; and each of them extends to its part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover that the half of the bandage be placed over the hip and the other below the fracture of the hip.
And similarly if the fracture is near the hip, then it should be placed the ligament over that place and over that hip.
Hold that firmly and work it, and as soon as it is well wrapped according to what is covered and applied for good application, then strengthen it so that it does not accidentally happen abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, then loosen the constriction on the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in vinegar and olive oil until the abscess heals, and then tighten it again.
And the way to tighten it is that you place a plaster on the fracture, and then place a layer of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open on their muscle.
And place the cloth and tighten it over the support of the arm so that the arm is in place of stars, if nothing prevents this from the broken bone.
And then use stars.
And it is that you place over the fracture that star that is pus wider and pus stronger of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers of all part.
And then tighten over the stars with the constriction which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your constriction over the place of the fracture be pus tight. And as much as the fracture is longer, the constriction be smaller.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear abscess, then you loosen the constriction and the stars on the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place proximately or inflammation; or is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of constriction; and therefore rectify all that as we have said.
But if you are on confidence that nothing will happen from this, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place on the support a cushion full of wool well wrapped, and consider in every hour of the night or of the day that the figure of the broken limb be not loosened or dissolved, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the patient's food according to the order which we have mentioned before, so that the food be subtle at the beginning while it is begun to tighten; and then cover that the food be thickened of it.
Because of custom of the support and the bed of it is that they be strengthened for forty days; and then cover that they be untied and be administered bath and be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid smooth, then you do not untie from that the ligament and the stars within a days or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two focils; of which one is small, and that is the one that lies the finger well, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed below the little finger, from the part further down.
And strong that is broken the major focil only, or the small, and strong that are broken together.
And when the small focil above is broken, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when the focil of it below is broken the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small focil above, then it is convenient to the physician, he must the restoration of it, that place small extension with facility until that be well wrapped.
But if the large focil is that which is broken, then cover that place extension more vehement.
And if the two focils are together broken, then cover that you place the constriction more strong.
And cover that you place the figure of the hand the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and let the wrist of the hand be at the parts above, more high than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a pillow laid down.
And let there be a cushion before it in the height or upright of it, so that the patient does not lean work.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part further down with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends above similarly.
And then the physician wraps the bones while reducing that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you pierce to reduce all that in its place with your virtue.
And if there appears in him a separated hernia that pierces the groin and is not in your hope of its restoration, then you must place it and remove it according to the manner which we have said before.
But if the fracture is with a plaque, I have already made a singular chapter about this, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be of medium thickness between fineness and roughness, and strengthen the cloth above it with a subtle structure until the abscess is subsided; and then remove the cerate and place an emplastre prepared of powder of ground clay mixed with egg white, and then place stars; and let the star be the one placed over the fracture, pus stronger and pus wider.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm is six in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one focus or in two foci together.
And place your structure over the place of the fracture, more strongly and more vehemently, and when the structure is more situated to the parts above the fracture or to the parts lower than it, place the structure a little softer according to that which is preceded the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture should be soft and humid cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of the proper thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any cause occurs of which rectification is necessary, as well as prudently the one that occurs to the limb, and then cover that you enwrap the limb with warm water until that prudency ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure is already softened and the bone is already remade and seems like those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited to reach the limb by superfluity of structure, for then cover that you soften it a little and let it for a few days until it runs to that the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not occur any of those causes that we have said, then cover that it should not be detached within about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of movement agitation, and make that sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or very soon it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and the fingers.
Know that to the thumb and to the knuckles of the fingers, tart it often happens a fracture, and it does not occur to them but attrition many times.
And when a fracture or attrition occurs to the hand, then cover that the patient should follow lying flat and in front of him lies the cloth according to equality, and then place the hand of him over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns those until they are conjoined with good conjoining.
And then cover that you place plaster and stopa, if no abscess occurs; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in a cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his fractured palm; then let it be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the star be of leather with cloth in which it is levitated, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what cover.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then cover that you place stars above and another star of the lower part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the structure, as if the hand is rolled to the wrist between the fingers and joints.
And if a fracture occurs to any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if the finger is placed, it should be aligned according to what cover and then strengthened with the palm and if you want, place a small straight star to it so that the fracture is elevated and not marred.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle location, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then it should be aligned and tied with the finger that is next to it; or all of them should be tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place on it a small star, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscesses and oppose — with your operation — to that which cover when any cause of those occurs, according to that which is iterated the narration of it.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip many times is broken and is declared to the sentiment according to that it is converted to the part in front and to the most sovereign.
And the restoration of him is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is left below the fracture, and the patient is prone on his belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is located at the root of the thigh, then the ligament is pulled towards the knee at the point of the pelvis, so that the extension is on it, and the other ligament is below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is located at the knee, then the ligament is pulled towards the knee, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bones with both his hands until it is reduced according to the natural likeness and the bone is joined by a good connection; then cover with plaster and a splint, if not, abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it, then you leave it for a few days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The splint of it is made like this: cover over the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove the superfluity from it; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the thigh.
And introduce a long cord between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the parts below, and the ends of the cord come from the sovereign part of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the vacancies between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint on the middle of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you move away with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your splint should be smaller and lighter and softer.
And then extend both ends of the cord to the parts below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on it, so that it does not occur to the limb corruption or abscess or inflammation and similar to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then cut it from it, and rectify what occurs to it all again, according to what we have said many times.
But if in the bone is the weight of the bone which is placed, then cover that according to what is possible to you; and if not, then cut over it and remove that, and cure with that of which the remembrance precedes until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is tightened with another thing which are adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a manner made do not occur to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then another thing which is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp from the one which is always.
And know that the thigh is tightened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that fracture of the kneecap is hard to mend, but it often occurs to it many times attrition.
But if it occurs to it fracture, then it is not but a fissure or a crack in its parts, and that is with a plague or a few plagues, and over that all is established with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is aligned what is broken of its parts with the said ones until it is joined and connected according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place on it a round splint, if you need it; and tighten over it a splint to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as abscess or similar to those, so that it opposes to all accident to what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called by the name of the tibia; and the other is thin, and it is called fibula.
And it occurs to some of the species of fracture that occurs to both bones of the leg, and for that reason is made restoration of it as well as restoration of the arm aligned, and the operation of it is one.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the parts in front.
And if the largest bone is broken, then support it, and those are the reasons why it is not your friend.
Then administer extension, flexion, and ligation of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the fracture of the leg is light and has many splints, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you align the stars and that completes your entire operation, then you will take pieces of wood of pine, which is placed under the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made of palm branches; some of those to which is small thickness, and not be of the handles, and be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the foot.
Then envelope on each strip in two envelopes according to its length, and place one on the side of the leg on one part and the other on the other part, and be from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
Then tie the two splints in three places of two extremities and to the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left, and it stands for good station.
And already is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed in it the leg so that it conserve that movement.
And moreover, cover that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly a plague.
And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by later study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or from other similar causes; and when accidences any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with that which cove within that it be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and of the toes.
To the talus no accidences fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot accidences fracture some times; and to the toes of the foot few accidences fracture, and no accidences to them but attrition in the middle of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot endves fracture and times those bones be elevated above each other, then the patient pause his foot on the earth prepared as if going.
And then pause one foot on that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and align those within that they return to the places.
And then pause plaster and stopa above, and pause below the belly of the foot a small table to which be two caps placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot with structure descent, because you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which you indigested.
And when to it pass three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones aligned, or be broken or be dislocated, and the operation in those is so as you coneysses.
But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and align them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then pause to the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and be more wide of it a little; and below the foot this table which and to you recounted, and strengthen that with stricture decent.
But if that which is broken of the bones be two or three or more, then you pause on each toe a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the heads of the table the belly of the foot so that it have with good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which that I have said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with that which cove.
Chapter XVIII.
Of fracture of the hip bone of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the groin of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a cradle fallen, and then incline that to the part of the back a little, and be held behind.
And then the matron impla the hip of cloth, and be made in the hip of her as she hopes; and then the woman be contused, and elevate the back of her little by little, because all that is fore-gotten within that it be before the part of the hip as she hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then pause pulvils on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate remove the cloth with facility and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you see that at the beginning, and then return to her first pulvil.
And do so for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the back of her a cannula of cane; and introduce all the bladder in the hip of her, and then insufflate in the cannula with virtue within that the bladder be inflated deintz the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with broth and kept for several days, until it heals.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or a woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these proper fractures and which few understand, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions the straight way in the restoration and in the tightening of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the leg of a man when it is broken, take a bandage of wool, and put the leg in it; and then place a covering of cloth over it, and it should be enveloped, and then let it rest for three days or around those, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is accompanied by plague.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or of the shoulder, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize him as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to its retention as much as you pulverize on it with a tri-colored, if to you another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not happen an abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered hip, then you must take care to reduce it and tie it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not to your prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven or eight, and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for this it is necessary to the physician that he prepares of those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And let it be round, and let it have little thickness so that it not be bent, the comprehension upon it during the hour of the operation.
And let it be of acute extremity at which let there be a margin in its extremities; and let the underside of it be of tending thickness, and of the majority of it within the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is the little palette.
Because it must be placed the extremity of it, it should ascend elevated upon the extremity of the prominent bone.
And impel it in one go until the bone returns, and it is tied with some equation.
And therefore strive to tie the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and does not take that instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recommended, then cut it with what you convey to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is possible to you.
And then cut that which remains in the bone of roughness and of small splinters.
And as the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels vehement and leading pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
When is completed your restoration which you make to the bone, and then immerse cloth in black stitic, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place upon the plague anything, nor other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause in it to happen putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you insert the tract with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, because many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to happen upon their patients death or disease corroding or ulceration, so it heals. And if your stricture lighter, softer, different from the stricture of the other fractures.
And if the plague is large or is bad plague, and you fear upon that some bad accidents the ones which we have recommended, and you feel pain in the place, then you must not place upon it stelas, but make to it an envelope of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And when about a day or two already the plague begins, that in it be engendered brac, then you remove from under the cloth which you had placed upon it with wine, and then administer calguas, ointments with which of our custom it is that we medicate the plagues, as such as tetrafarmacon and similar to it.
And it is necessary for you to untie the ligament and consider the wound every morning and evening before it is solidified and healed, and so that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus runs from it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass over the wound, and it is not solidified nor is the brac separated from it, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones, so that you should examine the wound with a probe. And of those satagias, those that are separated remove and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the limb and cause to occur pain, pierce you to incision those according to you it is possible.
And if it happens to the wound a suppuration or elution, it is stiomenios, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should put on it one of those with which you are accustomed to the cure of which is narrated in its chapter.
And of this, in which you should know the best course and you make present your weight: when the bone is fractured, elevate the member as if the bone of the thigh and the helper and similar to those of the large members, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it, for many times happens by this the death; have left it until you can, for very much it will fall by itself about 20 days or 30; And then cure the wound if it is seen, and if not leave it.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of a nodule that happens in the vestige of any fracture.
Many times happens this nodule in the vestige of the healing of a fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and is ornamented by it the figure of the limb; and very much it prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and administers in that medicines that have stipulated as if it is aloen, and ensis, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in this way that you take of that some or all, and confesse those with vi stiptic, or with album of huou, or with vi agre, and put that on the nodule in cotton, and constrict those over it for good constriction.
And leave the constriction that you do not untie it for many days; and then untie it and iterate another, until the nodule is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead descentment, for lead has the property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
May if nodule is already in a worse converted and strict is, and necessity provokes to oust that coytadament, and then scindeys it by the part sovereign of it, and incides the superfluity and eminent, or ratz it with some rezoris until it is removed; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then that which remains of the limb subtle and frail, then that is not done but for many causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of it made not according to what is due; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited to run to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for paucity of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And the cure of this is to give to the patient to eat and make the heart of him tender until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths; and intermet gaug and leticia over him.
And then put a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice draws to it much nourishment, or continue embrocation of it with aygua tebeza, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .xxii.
Of the cure of the broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of that which is due.
When it happens to the limb already restored during the healing of it from crookedness and eminence to the broken bone and nodule, and it is for that feeded of the form of the limb, but nevertheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of that one who exsisted that member be of novel broken.
But already are statz many foolish physicians and restorers the ones who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable perduzent at great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if claudication and nodule are recent, then you should be embrocated with aygua tebeza in which are joined mollificantz herbs, as if it is fuelas of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made a poultice with mollificatio poultice as dyallaquilon well made; or that be preza mucillage of root of altea and be contused with gray of gualina or with oli of cirami, and be emplastered with that; or that be prezes figs fatty and be trissadas with fems of colom, and similar to those of the medicines that are called amermans consolidacio.
And some times it is dissolved with assiduous friction lighter that be with the moist hands, and be administered movement of the limb to all parts at all hours.
But if the curvature is already added and is made strong and converted into a worse condition and the need for its cure arises with iron, then when it is the pus of the highest and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised that which superfluously of the knot of that half with the bone with subtle scissors, and it is administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of the limb, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it causes great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when an accident occurs to any dislocation, it is necessary to immediately reduce it, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb is suppurated and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And therefore, it should not be bad or stretched during the time of suppuration, because often it brings spasms and intense pain.
But when this happens, then it is necessary to apply a poultice to the suppurating limb, and let it rest until the suppuration ceases; and then the limb should be bandaged with warm water and oil, and then it should be reduced with facility.
And every limb should be cured with that which the remembrance will come back to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what precedes in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are dislocated if not tart; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that they are pulled out of their places by a small movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by a complete and complicated dislocation, so that they are softened at the junction until the saliva of the patient flows and that he cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped in his word.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major disposicions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary to administer its reduction gently, and not to delay it at all.
And that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the tip of his finger into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from inside his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both of his fingers at once, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of him are outside with which he pulls; and he commands the patient to cease his jaws and allow them to go from any part; and the doctor pulls the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer vaporization with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made lighter and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are pulled together, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on them powders of cloth with cerot, and make it of wax and oil rubbed; and then apply it gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not strain either to the right or to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be forbidden to him, until when the pains are reduced and the jaws are knitted, then he may chew what he wants.
And that be administered with facility, and do not work on the opening of the mouth, food and drink and conversation, until the jaw is knitted and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then many times this happens fever and persistent cough, and very much the belly of the patient is alarmed, and very much and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times that one dies who has this in 10 days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place from inside by its continuation with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with strong force, so that it will return.
And then place on that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which is tied and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary to be reduced and pulled together according to what we have said and according to what is to your apparatus.
And then place on that plaster, and powders, and constriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this same treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated in the part below the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated in the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the parts in front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and thrust out in the parts below the thigh, and most often in those in whom the flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it is thrust out with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men by a blow or fall, and the muscle of him is suppurated by a cautery abscess, and it is cured by that which already is dislocated.
Therefore, it behooves you that you proceed with this, while you are over-serious about him, and then you will proceed with the cure of him.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is in the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you find between those manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle concavity and below the thigh of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a wound, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his auricle, nor move it by all movements.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, and you then find manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the parts above; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below as it returns slightly.
But if by that which we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it behooves that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were the roots of althea, and fennel, and melilot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient be laid upon his back and be placed below the thigh of him waiting for a wool that be equal between levitation and constriction, and the physician places his hand on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle upwards, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it not be moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it not be moved to the parts below, for that instantly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and stand on that side, and interweaves his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates the thigh of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then it behooves that with him that other cause be suspended, so that the heavy one, for the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another manner: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground, the head of which is rounded in figure, as if a mortar, that it be neither thick nor thin, and then be placed below the patient; because when it is placed upon the head of the pole, the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place with velocity.
And if it is difficult reduction of it for all the causes which we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole the quantity of which be in the length of two arms, and the width of it be of four digits, and the thickness of it be eased in the groin of the thigh according to this form:
And upon the rounded head, be laid linen cloths so that the pole does not injure the patient.
And then be placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm be extended upon the pole into the parts below, and the pole be tied upon the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then be placed the arm upon a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other part, for the joint enters instantly.
And as the entrance of it is completed in whichever manner that is possible to you, then it behooves that you place below the thigh a wool sphere of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powdered mortar with eggs and album of an egg upon the whole muscle, as if it were rolled upwards, and then strength below the thigh with decent constriction; and the ligament be rolled upon the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to the neck of him, and be left, and not be moved the hand of him for seven days.
And that the patient's food be kept small, until the limb is comforted, for it is lighter for its healing.
And then the food be given greater near vii or v and be exercised a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that accedes to it or by another cause, then it is necessary that in that one be administered cautery with three points, according to that it is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the constriction are reduced upon it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot elevate that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the feet and the nipple or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And be administered in that the other constriction, and care that one until it is healed.
And if it happens that near the healing gravity falls in the limb and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is relieved and that it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and mostly to the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not known to you because it is hidden from the place or from the touch according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the hand, that is to you declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that its muscle.
And that you, the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to you abscess caut, because if it comes to it abscess caut, it is difficult the reduction of it, and fort leu it is not healed of all; and mostly when it is to the back parts, because it is worse of all the other species of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they leave to it death.
And the restoration of it, when it is that which is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be upon the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands together, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thus that it bends the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it not be remaugut from the extension.
And then be revolved the arm from all parts, because it is enveloped drape doubled long on the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil so that that is those causes which help in lubrication of the joint with facility; and then pushes the joint with impulse vehement until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is necessary that it be laid upon that plaster in which there is stiffness and extraction with album of egg, and it is extended with constriction descent, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave that one.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that one for some days until it is extended; and after loosen that one.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause upon the joint alleviated, so it is a cause of motion grease; and then be tied, and leave that one over the bones the day and the night. And after that, and put that one in bath; and when it dries, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over that alleviated, so it is ronhonal of motion, once, and the second, and the .iii.a., Corruption has already come upon the tooth within the bath, while it is still in.
And if you want, pause upon that fenda of cow humid and scalded with border and stren upon that; and do that some times, because that one is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of malassen, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Sometimes the dislocation of the arm is easy to reduce, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the opposite is true of the other joints, but however, it is important that the speed of its reduction is in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is festered or happens in it an abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the joint of the arm of the patient on a table, and the minister extends the arm of that one, and the physician places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it in while it returns to its place.
But however, it is important to consider if the palm is already broken in the belly of the arm, then the patient places the back of their arm on a table, despite the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding, then the position of the arm of that one intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the physician places on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore, if it returns so quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that one with a poultice, yielding the abscess and leaving it; and do not repeat this, because if not, do not suffer nor can you over the reduction of it more than days pass to it.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not give the patient any cause, unless the arm is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or twisted, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a cautery near the place of it and firmly do that confer any cause.
Therefore, when the malasse is returned, then place on it the poultice which have recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; and then let it be untied and let it be left and the arm of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and any gravity happens in it, then gently that one with warm water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated of those to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it is healed in that day.
And when it will be night, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do similar with this, if it is dislocated to the belly of the arm, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck happens dislocation complicated, and so remaugutz motz vertebrae from their places, then in that one is no cure, because death takes hold of the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside of his will, and cannot retain that; and many times are softened some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or is remaugut a vertebra from its place, because many times is remaugut and many times is made the removal of those to four parts.
Therefore, that one is already remaugut to the parts behind and is called gelbozitat.
But the cure of it is that then consider if the gelbozitat happens from puerility, because then in that one is no cure nor of that one is no healing of all.
But in that one that comes from a blow or from percussion or similar to those, already said the Ancients the manners of cure with sermons prolixs, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I already and shortened of that of which the little excuse of the too much of it, for the my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have here exposed and formed ex instrument divers of that with which I will show this and explain that.
And of those no is cured unless that one that happens in the back properly with that which I have recomposed.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face over a pug even prop of wall, and be extended below him instrument molh so that not be lifted the feet of him.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground in the extremity of the pug around the head of it, and another stick in the air the feet of it in the other extremity of the pug.
And the minister has the stick, and not be held in fossa; and another minister has the other according to that form.
And then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and leave the linen bandage firm; and extend the extremity of the bandage to the shaft which is the head of it, and tie it there; and then tighten the other bandage around the patient's hips, and tie it to the legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other shaft which is the feet.
And then the minister, having wrapped the bandage to the part of the shaft, and not being removed the two shafts and the bandages of their places in which they are placed, but however not being fastened as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while he returns, or who places upon that a table, and then that adjusts upon the table his feet while he returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the latitude or longitude is in the air of three arms, and carve in the wall of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then place the majority of the table upon the spine, and the doctor places his feet upon the other extremity, and tightens well while the spine is shortened and that it returns to its place.
And if you want, open with a turn which is revolved with the hand; and it is that you place on the ground behind the pug two shafts, the length of which is of an arm, and behind the head of it two shafts; and let the length that is between each shaft be a palm, and already it is made in each shaft a trough in which runs the turn, and each one be fastened to the ground so that it is not bad.
And let there be also a round shaft in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two troughs of the two shafts.
And in the extremity of it is a trough in which is formed the shaft, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other shafts is similar to that.
And then tighten the bandages that you have tightened in the feet of the patient in the trough which is the head of it, and the bandages that you have tightened in the thighs of it in the turn which is the feet of it.
And then place each turn and stay a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover with a paste made with dried album of egg, and then cotton; and then place on the paste a table of which the latitude is three digits or about those, and the length of it is the quantity that reaches the place of the yellowness, and on the part of the spine it is.
And then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while he is healing.
And if any imminence remains in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that it be administered medicines that soften and cleanse with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a sheet of lead.
And some times there happens imminence in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already threatens because it should not be done proscription to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you happen death.
Chapter .XXXI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be a dislocation only, and it does not happen to those that happen to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four manners, because it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the outside parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inside parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the inside parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot in the direction of the knee, and it is the place that sees the knee joint inflamed with a cautery abscess, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation is to the outside parts, is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the front parts is that it expands its thigh according to compliance, but however it does not bend that which is pain in the thigh, and if it is forced to go and cannot go over that to the front parts; and the urine of it is retained and the groin of it is inflamed, and because of the ambulation of it upon the heel.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that which bends the groin, and the thigh of it is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
But the reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is old and antique, which is already fixed with the having that near you administer reduction of it and remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore no hope that in that be made presumption.
But in that of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then take care that you turn the joint and extend it to the parts within and to the parts outside, and move it to the right and left, for it is very likely to return and does not need other cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the farthest part, or with his hands, or with a bandage which is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of him from below so that he puts his hands below the thighs of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And that extension of him or from the part within to the angle of the shoulder, or from the part behind to the part of the back.
And that extension of all those in one go while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and that remains hanging.
And this species of extension is special common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then in every species it is necessary to do what I will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of it proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts within, then the patient must be laid on his side; and then place the bandages on the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is below the shoulder; and then extend the bandage from the part of the shoulder to the highest part of the shoulder blade.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and hold the thick place of the thigh of the patient and extend to the parts outside by violent extension, for that returns to its place.
And this species is of lighter cure with which this limb is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused on you and you do not obey the entry with this species of cure of all, then you must tie both legs of the patient together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both knees.
And the length of each of its parts by the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient be suspended over the head of the pole, and that be in the middle; and the length of it from the ground the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the thigh, and that be suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man pulls the thigh with strength and impulsion, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is at the part outside, then the patient must lie on his stomach according to what we have recommended in the having gelbozitat; and be tightened the bandage on the thigh of the patient properly and on the feet of him.
And then two poles be placed, one at the feet of him, and the other at the head; and then be placed poles adjusted to the middle of the arm put on which wet cloths be enveloped, so that the patient be not damaged because the pole is between the thighs of him, for that the extension to the parts below be not pulled.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts in front, then the leg must be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about arm; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the shoulder of the patient, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that pull places that extended to the parts below to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the parts behind, then the patient must not be extended to the parts below, and it is elevated above the ground; having must be placed on hard cause, as much as the  eyssament if the width of him is dislocated at the parts outside, according to what we have said of the jasement of him on two widths; and it is on his face and the bandages be extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And that compression be administered with a board on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what you must—the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend from the patient two legs, and when you see those enguals and the patient extends his leg and expands that ses excusacio, then you know that the limb according to what you must is returned—and then you adjust two cushions and put plaster and extend with bandage so that the width is not damaged in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those bones in place, then you know the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and bandage that, and extend that according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
And then untie that, and make that person delay in walking for a few days, until it is comfortable.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the finger.
The finger is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the back parts more to the front parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the finger is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can above that; adhere your two to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the finger of it to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the finger of it with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the finger returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with light effortless.
And then bandage that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then untie those.
And do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is dislocated by a small movement, and some times is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation of it is of light reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, it is necessary that you make the patient straight, and have one minister strong and valiant of the back part of the two in the middle place of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the most back part of the foot in the place of the heel.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left two times, and then extend with the left; and you push the foot of the foot with the right towards the thigh, so that the leg works.
And do this twice according to what we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the thigh the third time, and you are at the heel.
Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, for that returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of it with what we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth on the ground firm, and that it lies between the thighs of it, and you already have enveloped over it cloth so that it does not hurt the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with a ligament that lies on the collar of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the cloth be extended between the thighs of the patient retaining it, so that the body of it not be pulled to the back parts towards its extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the back parts, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause plaster and extend that with strong ligaments, and tie the foot with a ligament to the thigh.
And that you fear or take care of the nerves that are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over it is not vehement and hurts it strongly.
And then leave that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend that.
And then untie that on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from movement for forty days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done securely that the dislocation not be over it dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if a boil occurs on him, then you must administer in the treatment of it the water which I mentioned before in our narration, in another place of treatment and ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Let him who is dislocated be bandaged with little extension of his work; and that which is not difficult, raise it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you must make the patient place his foot on a level ground or table, and be standing thus as if he were going.
And then you stand near his feet, and place your foot over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press it with your foot with force until it returns, and that you see it already straightened and does not appear in the place prominence.
And then place under the foot of him a table that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
When any of those causes occurs, and you are engaged in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times death occurs.
And for this reason, you must not presume over its cure, but rather he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not bold nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that cause boils to burst only so much, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of the disease, and in which you see some hope. And therefore, strive as quickly as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a festering boil.
And therefore, if the limb returns as we desire, then administer the regimen which causes boils to burst and cures the plague with the water that convenes to it from the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must pierce the ligament of them, and do in this what we have said in the simple illnesses of this which is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the treatment in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my preaching to you; for this is better, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which may God be the beneficiary. Amen.
