O, son, this book is a treatise on medicine, which I have completed.
And if the patient's legs are swollen, and if they are not, then the intestines should be treated by applying heat to their feet.
The patient described is suffering from a condition that causes painful swelling in their joints.
It describes how to apply the knowledge of anatomy to determine the proper way to apply cautery to the body, specifically mentioning the types of blood vessels: pulsatile (arteries) and non-pulsatile (veins), and the number of these vessels.
The text describes a doctor treating a patient by using a cautery to burn away excess fluids in the joints.
One must be careful that in treating gout, one does not mistake it for something else, which would lead to inappropriate treatment.
A doctor cauterized the inflamed joint of a woman who had been burned by an unknown cause, leaving her with a deadened limb.
And so he saw another doctor, who was unable to stop that man's ailment.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, they will die.
Here comes the doctor who was paid by him for surgery; another comes on the legs, because the pain is in the legs and they are swollen due to a fracture.
The humors of the body are balanced and they are treating the patient.
E a desliar la desitata
But when the pain of the foot is confirmed, it is done so that the patient does not experience the pain in the foot.
And if there's another doctor who has been summoned, he will know what to do.
And if the ailment is caused by a melancholic humor, then it will be necessary to use cauterization.
And so, sons, it is necessary for you to open the body only after providing cushions for the cushions on their legs, and other places where they are needed.
And you have to keep in mind that already in all the places of the body are mentioned.
And so you should treat those with gout by God's grace, and with a hot iron to cauterize the affected areas.
And prepare your weapons for battle, so that they may be used for your benefit and the glory of God.
Another thing to note is that when a pain is felt in the legs, it is often mistaken for gout. Do not be a doctor who makes a false diagnosis when treating someone with a disease.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first chapter. This first chapter is about the tools used in surgery.
This is the second part. The second chapter describes how to treat wounds caused by arrows.
The third chapter deals with the treatment of pain caused by excess blood or the removal of obstructions in the body; the chapter on restoration also covers how to treat the pain of gout.
The patient's condition prohibits the use of cautery on their feet.
And therefore, I have said that it is called gout when the joints are inflamed and painful.
And if there are other conditions, that's what doctors call a cautery, which can be quite different from humors.
And if it is necessary to treat a cold illness, it should be treated with heat and dryness.
This cushion is placed on the patient's legs to treat their ailment.
And if you have already found the patient's feet to be affected, you will know that they are experiencing gout.
Then, however, when the intestine or other injuries are present, apply cautery to the affected area.
When Mays is in other parts of the body, there is no need for fear because it's already understood that it is a disease related to the cold humors.
And so you have placed the patient's body in the balance by applying heat to relieve pain from the ailment.
May the medicine be applied to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, they should be used as described in the first two lines.
And you know that the pain occurs in the legs, and so they put a cushion on their thighs, and another for the feet.
And so if a patient has an injury to their leg, there is no need for a cautery because it is a common ailment that can be treated with cauterization.
And if your doctors think that you have a fever that comes from the humors that are in the body, they will cauterize the part of the body affected by the cold humors.
When doctors see that the patient has a pain in their feet, they should use hot cauterization to treat them.
Mays the patient be treated for the illness they suffer from.
A consequence of excessive sweating is that you may need to apply a poultice or cautery to the affected area, which is the reason for the ailment, for other reasons, or to prevent further problems with the body's humors.
E  mays be used to treat a patient's cushion, but it is not for all ailments.
If the cause of the illness is unknown, then the treatment should be aimed at the intestines. Then apply the following to the patient's body: when the treatment for gout is applied in a manner that is customary, but not proper medicine.
E si es milhor per l'atela eurin que you are using to apply the cushion of your treatment.
And so you have already found out that the patient has a condition called gout.
Then apply the cautery on the other side of the joint.
And if I have to open their intestines, then I put a cushion on their legs, and others on their knees.
The first chapter.
And so the patient's body may be cooled by applying a cautery to their legs or by placing ice on them.
And you apply the cushion to their legs, and use medicine to make the humors flow out.
And place a cushion on the patient's feet and apply to the area under their legs.
And then place your hand upon their palm between the other two cushions. But you're talking about the other way around, which I believe should be used for the treatment of gout in the feet.
And so that the patient's hands are not subject to the pain.
E aprop poseys le tua ma al os per la cushion that you have put your hand under the location to see if the pain persists as it would in a case of gout.
And so place a cushion on their legs for three days.
And then you should place a cushion on the affected joint. And apply a poultice to the area of the affected part.
Then they say that when the plague is called forth by a surgeon, then he's better than a healer.
And if they have pain in the bones, and are suffering from gout.
And then let the bone be cauterized, which will be cured.
And others say that it's a burn on their feet. And they say that he has a hot fever.
Then your hand should be placed on the patient's legs to hold them in place.
Mayes a mi no so provera la vista in those who have been put to the test.
And the first treatment is to apply a poultice to the foot, so that the intestines do not come out.
Chapter two.
Then apply the hot cautery.
Then consider if the pain in the leg is from one of those causes And then apply a hot cautery to the top of the foot. In that case, the intestine is cut open and cauterized, allowing for air to be released from the body. And if you have other pain in the limbs, it is necessary to apply a cushion to support the patient's body on the legs.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area, and use a gentler cautery for the head.
The third chapter.
And on the treatment of gout.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area; if it doesn’t work, use other treatments for the pain.
When there are hot, swollen humors in the body that cause pain, apply a cold cautery to the head. Then apply heat to the affected area on their legs, as this will help soothe the pain.
Then lay a hot compress on the patient's legs for three hours.
And apply an ointment to the patient's legs so that they are kept in a state of health.
And if the patient's body needs to be treated with other remedies, the physician should apply them.
And may it be done in this manner.
And if the patient's legs are affected by gout, you will need to cauterize them.
And so you must apply a cautery to the small bones of the body.
And if the quantity of blood in the legs has become inflamed, apply a cushion to reduce the swelling.
And if you are using another cushion on their legs, apply it for three days, and then remove it to allow the wound to heal.
And if you wish, the other method is to cauterize the patient's artery.
Chapter four.
This refers to the treatment of gout.
When gout flares up, it is treated by applying a poultice to the affected area.
Empero, you must cauterize the intestine or the hernia in the appropriate way.
E lay the cushion at the beginning of the operation.
And then apply the treatment for blood flow according to the book's instructions.
This text means: If you see that the patient has an intestine or foot pain in this ailment, it is treated by cauterizing them, but only if they are already suffering from a serious illness.
And if you have already seen that the patient has a fever, another treatment should be administered.
Chapter 5.
This is a section from an old medical text about treating pain in the ears.
When there is pain in the area of the auricle, it is called "earache" by doctors.
When it is necessary to bleed or apply cautery to treat a patient, do so. The translator extends the meaning of al-gias to include the entire body, while noting that pus is involved in the ailment.
Then use the cauterizer to treat the other ailments within their body.
The book teaches that the patient's body should be treated as if it were a temple after the first few lines are translated.
A hot iron applied to the area of the body affected by the ailment.
And it is the nature of the physician to apply heat to the patient's body.
This is the process of applying cautery to the patient's legs.
You must use three other methods to treat the patient.
And if there is a need to apply a cautery on the surface of the body, it should be applied only where it is necessary, and no more.
And if a burn mark needs to be made on the body, you should place a cushion on the patient's right hand or foot to keep them from moving.
The form of the instrument is as follows: it is a knife for cauterizing with a special blade shape designed for that purpose. But some people have a little bit of a bad temper.
And apply a bandage to the treated leg to prevent further illness.
Chapter 7
This refers to cauterization used as a treatment for gout.
And if the pain is not accompanied by fever, then you should use the methods we have described for treating that condition. And the way to treat it is done as has been previously described.
Then cauterize the stomach area and place another cushion on their feet.
Chapter 8.
When a burning sensation occurs in the body, its cause is often hidden from view.
The patient's body was covered with large stones, pills to break the stones were used, and they are treated by applying heat.
Then apply a plaster to the aforementioned ailment.
Then place cushions on them for several times, or use a cautery to treat it. And so the patient's pain should be addressed by the physician.
Then apply three cauterizations to the affected parts: the legs, feet, or other areas. Then proceed to treat the patient's gout, and make sure the inflammation doesn't spread.
Mays le metges are to be used for minor pain, while a cushion should be used for more serious cases.
And if it is necessary to cure the patient's gout, use a cushion as described previously.
This is likely the beginning of a chapter heading in Latin, perhaps meaning "Chapter 9".
The whole body.
and if it is necessary to treat a person's illness, you must apply the cushion on their limbs
When pain is severe, the patient's condition may be aggravated by excessive heat on their body. And if the patient has already been treated by the physician, they are now ready for the olive oil cautery.
Chapter 10.
This refers to the treatment of epilepsy, a common practice in medieval medicine being to burn the affected area.
This is the first cushion for treating the ailment called epilepsy.
Therefore, the physician should treat the other ailments accordingly, as they are being treated for them.
And if the ailment is treated with medicines, they are for the child who suffers from them for a few days.
E's the precedent way to heat the head and another part of the body, e en their place put your hand upon them. And if the affected area is painful, you have already given the patient a cushion to place on their legs, which are in pain.
And apply the cautery to the which you will apply the olive oil, then another olivar on their legs, according to the custom of the patient's place, and put the patient under a cushion.
If the child has gout, the treatment will be different.
Chapter 11
This is a treatise on treating melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and the intestines are affected, then cauterize the patient's body in their entirety.
A person suffering from melencolia should keep a hot cloth on the area of the body where the pain occurs.
And a poultice should be made for the injured person to place on their head.
And if the pain is located on the legs or any other place.
E aprop you should apply the poultice to the affected area; if it's on the leg, use a cushion for that too. And if it is necessary to make a fire upon the body, measure it carefully. Then place a cloth on their legs to protect them from the cold.
Then the surgeon applies a cushion to the patient's legs to reduce swelling.
And then place a cushion under their own body.
The patient's legs are being burned by a hot iron.
The pain felt in the feet or toes was already called podagra by doctors.
And if it is caused by other signs or symptoms, then the treatment will be described as a cure for the ailment.
And let him have a warm bath for several days.
Then cauterize the head on the two temples if there are two wounds, or on one temple if there is only one wound.
This is a very literal translation of the first sentence: If your body is affected by gout, another is applied to the veins and arteries.
And if the blood flows from the cautery used on them, the other to their legs; and another one to their blood vessels.
And now the surgeon places his hand on the patient's legs to operate on them.
And if the pain occurs in the lower leg, they are treated with a hot cautery.
The text refers to the following sentences as "podras" which seems related to "poisons," suggesting it is about applying them to the area affected by the illness.
And if the patient has a fever, apply cooling compresses.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area if necessary. And if you have already been diagnosed with a disease, then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Chapter 14
De cauterizatio de nas intempestivus, et si non est curavit, e’l corpore malus.
In case the patient is too weak for surgery, you can try another treatment method. And then put a cushion on the legs to prevent the opening of the space between the two for the treatment.
And guard the patient's feet from being harmed.
And here's the way to use a cautery for other purposes.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
And this is how you treat the affected eyelid with this type of treatment.
And if you place a cautery on the temples, they will be covered by another patch. And so, you should apply a cushion to the legs, etc.
You are correct, the text refers to the use of cautery in a medical context.
The 16th chapter.
Then you will use the cautery on the patient's foot and another will hold the person down.
When the doctors call it gout, they mean the intestine or legs have been affected by an imbalance in the humors.
If a cauterizer has already been used on you, treat them gently, as they are often called upon to perform painful procedures.
And so the patient, whose body has been made ill by the cold, should be treated with the following steps:  a cushion is to be placed on the legs and another on the head of the person who is ill.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's thighs.
And then place a cushion on the patient's legs.
And then you should cauterize the affected area that is where the herb is applied to the legs.
And if you see that the patient's eyelid has swollen shut due to the use of a needle on their legs, they will need to be treated by a physician.
And so raise your leg and place it on the cushion for three days, as needed. And if you want to cure them, apply a poultice to their legs.
If the body is weakened by illness or injury, place a cushion under their limbs.
And if you have elevated the lid the skin folds naturally back over the hernia.
And thus he will cauterize the legs of the patient with a heated, metal-tipped tool for relief from their ailment.
And you have already placed your hand on their feet, so that the patient’s legs are covered by cushions.
It means: "And he who feels the pain will be able to apply the treatment."
Then apply the remedy to the affected area.
And if you have removed the cushion from their joints so the illness doesn't spread further, place another cushion on their body to stop the pain.
And so that the patient's illness in the foot can be treated by you, or another, as soon as possible.
And this is the way of applying a poultice of myrtle.
"And so you know, the humors are different for each person, just as the pain in their legs, or elsewhere."
This pain will be cured by someone who has studied this art.
Another hot cautery is used for pain in the legs, and another one for the patient's feet.
E si no has la ubers e altri to their chest, another would be put there.
When you are treating a patient with a disease, place a cushion under their head, and have them rest with a cushion on their legs, so that they do not move.
And then place a cushion under them, and another servant on their legs, et a second one on the patient's body.
And if there's a need to treat the ailment on the patient's legs, another person should be holding their legs while you apply the treatment.
The other servant is used to treat the foot for pain.
And if you wish, place a cushion under the patient's foot. And if you want, use a hot cautery to remove the excess.
However, the man who works hard deserves better than gout.
Then place a cushion on their legs, and let them know that they are being cauterized. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you wish to avoid pain, then apply the cautery to the foot, specifically the cushion of the body part where a bandage is applied.
And if their bones are affected, then it will be necessary to cauterize the part twice.
This must be given to him/her immediately, and his/her hands should be held over the area so he/she can be treated with strong medicine.
The cushion in the cavity will be used to help you treat the fistula first.
If a fistula has been healed by the doctor, it's good; otherwise, it should be treated with fire and surgery.
Capitol.xviii.
And then cauterize the wound on the leg.
Inflammation of the infant's lips may be treated by applying a cushion to the area.
And now, how to treat the burning pain we have already begun to treat in the manner described below.
This sentence refers to the treatment of the ailment by doctors, suggesting they would use a hot cautery for pain relief in the legs.
And if it is necessary to make a burn on their legs, then you must carefully cauterize the area.
And if it is necessary, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xix.
This refers to using a hot iron on the body to treat a condition similar to a boil or abscess.
And if the patient's uvula or uvula be inflamed, and inflammation occurs in the palate, and the patient has a condition called gout, you should apply the cold cautery to the palate so that the swelling will subside.
And thus if the wound heals well, cauterize it, and bandage it up so that it will not come out.
The English translation of "Capitol .xx." would be "Chapter 20".
Single-line guessed translation: And if it is necessary to soften the throat.
And if you are in pain from a cold that is caused by humors, apply heat to the area using one of the following methods:
And keep your hand on the patient's legs, and let the other be used for some purpose.
E then placed a cushion in the patient's mouth, to prevent them from being able to speak.
Chapter .xxi.
Of cauterization for toothache.
Then use a hot iron to apply a cauteri to the affected area.
It is customary to use a hot cautery on an inflamed joint, but in the case of pain in the feet, it is better to apply cold therapy.
And then apply heat to the patient's legs, and if needed, use other treatments for the ailment.
When a tooth aches, it's called the "toothache" in Italian.
May the cushion be used to heat the body.
Then apply the poultice to the affected area.
Then return your hand to the patient's leg after you have cauterized them, so that the pain will not be felt by the patient.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient, apply the heat according to your judgment.
And this is the way of gout:
Another hand on their feet, and another cushion under them, and the patient is now placed on the cushions on the floor.
On the treatment of gout.
Then you have already opened the wound, and applied the cushion to the patient's leg, and applied the other medicines.
And if the inflammation is small, you will cauterize it with a few applications of a hot iron, and if the abscesses are already present on the legs, they will be healed by applying heat to them.
And if it is necessary to apply medicine, the patient's legs should be treated carefully.
A la boca del cos, si applies a body, that is necessary for the treatment of gout.
A cushion is placed under the patient's thighs.
Then if the patient has a fever, e.g., a hot humor in the foot, use other methods on the chest, such as cauterization.
And apply the cautery to the patient's throat, carefully using only a small amount of heat.
And cauterize their other legs to prevent them from being cauterized again. And apply a cautery to their legs in the same way as the intestines are treated.
Then apply a cautery to the leg to cure the disease.
And now the chapter 24.
Here comes the translated sentence:
Then apply a hot iron to the body below the knee only if the patient needs to be cauterized.
And if you wish, let the patient be treated with a cauterization to their ears, which will be applied to them.
E siam curai en lo corpo e no se sa".
And so they are called gout in the modern sense.
Chapter 25.
And if the patient's foot needs to be cauterized, then it should be done with care.
And if you are working on the patient's foot, and when their body is open, they are applying pressure to the area.
And so, the patient's body has two heads.
And if there's inflammation in the groin, use cauterization to reduce pain and swelling, and apply the hot iron to the area of the other leg where the pain is located.
And sometimes, the doctors are wrong, and they think it's gout.
Then place your hand on the patient's body, for a while after the wound heals.
And if a cushion is placed on the chest, then it will be called a romat (a type of illness).
E a la persona que ha tenen le dolor de las coyssas, e si estant en la part del cors que se fa per el malalte.
This refers to a treatment for stomach ailments.
Then place cushions on the legs of the patient to prevent his body from being too dry or too wet.
And if the depth of the cautery is too great, it will cause pain in the feet.
And so the patient's intestine is treated with cautery, according to this method.
And if the patient has pain in the stomach, then you use a cautery to apply heat to that area.
Then apply the proper name for the cavity.
Then apply a cushion to their feet.
Translation 1: And if it is necessary to treat the body with bloodletting, use the same method as for the other diseases caused by an excess of cold humors in the body, which is what doctors normally call a fever.
And if the pain is in the feet, then the first two lines are the best way to treat it.
And do not press upon the patient while he's being treated with cauterization.
And if the pain is caused by a cushion under the legs, then it's called [the condition] that causes gout.
You may have to use a sharp cautery for the patient's ailment, if they are treated with the proper tools and knowledge.
And so that the burning sensation does not spread throughout the body, you must use a different kind of cautery.
**Capitol .xxviii.  is likely the title of the 28th chapter.**
The word "perforaco" suggests the source sentence refers to cutting into something (like making an incision) or treating a wound by removing something.
If there is a necessity to treat someone's humors, they should place cushions on their feet and under the affected area.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then apply cautery to the tunic of the leg.
Then we will try to apply heat to the area above the boil (the other one) on the foot; they also say that the boil is in a place where it can be treated with cauterization. And cauterize it where the pain is felt in the legs or bowels, so that the pain may be relieved.
Then treat them with cushions under their legs, and another treatment for the foot with your hand.
And if there are people who have suffered from other ailments, they use it for pain in the legs, and for the treatment of wounds.
In the Capitol, it is customary to call it gout if someone has pain in their feet due to an imbalance in bodily humors.
When there is pain in the lower part of the body, it is known as gout.
This refers to treating the ailment of the foot by applying a cautery tool to the affected area.
Then apply a hot compress to the affected area.
The physician must ensure the patient has a cushion placed under their legs and another on their chest during treatment.
This cushion is for those who are already in the throes of pain.
"There is no fear of that which is in this place, but rather a fear of that which is"  a "sickness".
Capitol .xxx. translated into English would be: **Chapter 30.**
Of the cauterization of the melon.
When you cure a disease in the leg with a cautery, it can be done on the knee or the thigh.
The patient's foot is being burned by a hot iron.
And if you need to make bloodletting wounds on the patient, use a cauterizing tool.
E si el dolor es en le pie, e'l otro en la coys lu.
And so that the surgeon may apply cautery to the length of the body while another attends to the length of their needs.
Then apply cauteries to the legs, while holding the patient's hands?
And thus you apply the cautery; and so make four cauterizations.
And if you want, burn it with a hot cautery.
Then you apply a cautery to heal the wound.
Chapter XXX. I.
And if it is necessary to make an incision for treatment, it is customary to use other methods on the foot.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area, placing a hot cautery directly on it.
This sentence discusses the use of cauterization for medical treatment in medieval times. And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's thighs, place it properly on their legs, and have another thing for the other things.
When you treat someone with gout, their legs are often painful.
And there's no cure for gout when the pain is caused by their foot being too hot or too cold.
Then the patient's foot must be cauterized in the manner described above.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful swelling and inflammation in the joints, particularly the feet.
Then return the leg to its natural position.
When the disease has already spread to their fingers, apply another cushion to the affected area.
Then apply the cauterization tool to the patient's legs. The patient's intestines are inflamed, so they should be treated with leeches according to the prevailing medical practices.
And keep it open so that the cure can be applied on their legs.
Apros then treat the patient's legs with hot stones or other such things to stop the humors from swelling.
And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the body, use cauterization.
And so, you see, it's called gout by doctors.
This sentence describes the use of a cautery tool in a medical procedure.
And if you are treating for excess humidity, use two cauteries to work on the swollen area of the foot.
Then apply the cautery only to the area where the pain occurs.
Therefore, use a cautery to treat hemorrhoids.
Then apply three poultices to the patient's body, and place them on their legs, and apply three more to the abdomen.
If you see that a patient has cold food and they don't digest it properly, let them put a cushion on their stomach; and if the body is in pain, I will apply heat with a cautery to the area of the stomach.
This is about Chapter 35 in a book or document.
And if you are burning the skin of the patient, apply cauterization to their legs, place your hand on the other part of the body, and use a cushion for the other parts, and another for the feet.
When you cut the vein of the body, apply a hot iron to prevent the swelling. Then apply pressure to the affected area with the instrument that was used on the other parts of the body.
And do they apply a hot iron to two points on their thighs?
Another place to place a cushion on the foot in order to protect it from the cold.
This sentence appears to be a continuation of the previous ones, indicating a new chapter in a text.
And put a cushion under their feet, and hold them above their body, so that the humors do not escape.
When the nature of the patient's fear is known, apply the cushion to their body, and let them know that they are in safe hands.
Therefore, if there are complications from fluid buildup in the body, such as gout, they should be treated by addressing the underlying cause.
And if you wish to treat the ailment yourself, use a hot iron. Then put a cushion in the cavity of the fistula.
And they call it another cautery if there are aches in the foot.
When there are burns or an inflamed vein, they should be treated for gout, but if it's a cushion, then only those burns affecting the body's nerves should be treated with the hand placed on the affected area.
Then place your hand on the patient's legs.
When the patient is in a good state of health, et the pain is alleviated.
And if the pain persists, the patient should be treated with a remedy to soothe the affected area.
When there are no more physicians, then apply a hot cautery.
On the use of cautery for treating gout.
When there are pains in the thighs, use heat to warm them up.
This is the translation: And if the pain is strong, it is called gout in the second toe.
Chapter 38.
Then apply cautery to the patient's bladder.
Then put the other hand on their legs, to prevent the urine from flowing into the wrong place.
Then apply heat to the affected part of the body.
And another cushion should be placed on their legs to prevent swelling from the other cushions.
Capitol .xxxix.
And so let us return to the original text from the source language.
Then apply a hot cautery to the bladder to treat the bladder's ailments.
Translation: When one has pain in the joints due to cold humors that are coming out.
This refers to a medical procedure involving cauterization (burning) related to treating a dislocation in the leg or foot.
When the pain is caused by humors that are out of balance in the body, it is called a cushion for a member when you have your hand on their legs, which indicates its presence. And it is customary for the body to be placed in its proper position when it is ill.
Then there comes the time when you will cauterize the affected area, for gout often causes pain in the legs.
And if you have a pain in their leg, it is called gout.
Then, if you are going to cauterize their legs, do so with another three cushions.
And if a burn develops, then apply the cautery to heal it.
Chapter xli.
This translates to "of the cauterization of the sciatic vein"
A physician should treat that which causes pain in the joints.
The manner of treatment for a person with gout is to treat the pain with medicines or fire.
The patient's legs are opened for three cushions to be placed under them. When there is pain in the foot, it is customary to apply a cautery.
At times the doctors may need to use cautery on the legs.
And if you wish to use another method for relieving pain in the legs, do it by cauterizing the pain from the affected area.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the foot, do not use heat near the area to avoid burning the patient's skin.
This refers to gout as a disease, but also describes the position of the patient's foot.
And if you apply cauterization, the treatment for gout will be more effective when used on the affected area.
And if the pain is severe, it is common practice to treat the patient's body with a cautery device.
When pain is in the legs or other parts, they are to be treated with a cauterization using a knife-like instrument.
And if you have an ailment that requires cauterization, be careful in using a cautery to seal the wound.
The patient's foot is inflamed, place a cushion under their foot. And then apply a strong cold compress to the abdomen, or if there are no more, put them in contact with a cauterized area.
And if there is pain in the legs, apply heat to each affected joint.
When there's a swelling in the legs, they say that it's a sign of a problem.
And you should place three fingers on their legs to indicate the location of the pain.
This describes the pain experienced by the patient during surgery. Then place a cushion on them.
And if the pain is severe, leave the patient three days to heal.
This is the first is used for treating this type of ailment.
And the pain of the body will be relieved by their use.
Mays cauteri are medicines that keep the body from suffering.
Then return to the original meaning of the text, the first part of the sentence refers to the previous one, which means "Let us make a cautery be placed."
Then apply heat to the other side of the leg.
Then apply the cushion on the patient's leg to elevate their leg.
And if you want to know about the treatment of that intestine that's being held back, you should know that the patient will be in pain for three days.
And then you apply your treatment on that leg.
And then you must apply the treatment according to the patient's needs.
This is how you can treat a hernia by using a cauterization method. When treating gout, use a cushion to support their head and another cushion on each side of the body, one for the legs and one for the feet, but make sure the patient is comfortable.
The first cushion is used for the other ailments mentioned in the previous text.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area and another to the patient's foot and hand to protect them from being burned.
And if you are to cauterize it, use a cushion on the legs so that it will be burned.
Then, when the intestine or other organs are already being operated on, you can use a cushion to support him and prevent injury.
And so, when the pain is caused by a slight imbalance in the body, they cauterize the area to make it better.
And so we see that if the pain is caused by cold humors in the legs, it lasts for three hours.
And so the doctors would treat the patient's illness, for their good health.
Then, they say, if a patient has a cushion on their hands or feet, their condition will be known as gout.
And if a sheep's wool is used to treat a wound, apply it gently warmed with the heat from the other two goats, and hold a cushion on their legs during the process, you can use this method for treating wool or cauterizing an intestine.
Then apply heat to the skin near their ankles. And if there's pain in the feet, then place your hand on their knees to prevent further pain.
This method is called gout.
When the pain of rheumatism affects the joints.
Of burning or cutting pain in the legs.
And if the pain persists in the feet, it's due to an excess of cold and humid fluids in the body.
And then apply cauterization to their legs, but only to that limb.
And if it is customarily to do so, it is called gout by the doctor.
And there is a practice called cauterization for those who have been injured by fire.
When it is necessary to treat the swelling in the feet, then use a hot iron.
The text discusses a painful condition affecting the joints.
At first, it is necessary to cauterize the foot.
Gout is caused by an excess of something in the body, and this sentence describes its treatment.
And if the pain is in the back, it is customary to place a cushion on the spine and apply heat to the joints.
And so when you cauterize the legs, the patient's pain is caused by cold humors which have infiltrated the body. Then the cushion must be placed over the whole leg to ensure that the pain is alleviated.
Cauterize the spine in two to three lines. When doctors use heat therapy on the affected joints, it is then called gout.
Then apply the cautery to the area we have mentioned.
and you should avoid applying it to the area if it's due to gout.
Chapter xliv.
This is a medical text describing gout.
And if there is an excess of cold humors, it is gout that affects the joints.
And so if it is cured, you can apply the other treatments.
And if you need to cauterize anything, use a cautery tool specifically for that purpose.
This sentence means "Use a hot iron"
And if it is necessary to make a cushion for the foot. And if there are pains in the joints or in the legs, you must apply three to four poultices using the herb called "gout" (or rather, a more accurate description).
And if it is necessary to burn with a cauterizer, the one who cauterizes should be gentle so the cautery does not damage the tissue.
And if the patient has pain, apply the cushion to their legs.
Then return the patient's body to its normal state.
Then apply your hand to the affected limb or area.
Then if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, or cauterize it, apply the cushion to their feet.
G: When the intestine is inflamed, treat it with a cushion.
This is Latin for "Chapter 45."
The following is a guess at a translation based on your provided context:
And if it is necessary to cause pain in the legs, you should apply a cushion under their feet.
And if you are going to cauterize, then apply the cautery to the legs when it is necessary for the patient's pain.
And if the doctor determines that you have a circle-shaped rupture in your body.
And place a cushion on the legs to treat them.
It is said that the patient has gout if they have pain in the joints, which causes their legs to be covered in cushions. Then then you apply a cushion to the legs, and another one on the chest.
And if you have to put a hot iron on the foot of a patient, it is recommended to place a cushion under them.
And then place the cautery on their joints to prevent the pain from spreading further.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
When you are treating a patient, and their pain arises from the bone.
And if it is necessary to make incisions, ensure they are subtle in their nature for children.
E' approvable cura la sua loc per via de la medicina.
The patient's legs are burned.
Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area, and then apply another cushion under them.
And when you place your hands on the patient's legs, apply the poultice to prevent the pain from worsening.
And if they want to move the foot for more than 40 days, it is customary to have a cushion under it.
And you should apply this remedy to treat gout: use a cautery on the feet, and another for applying them to their proper place.
And so you cauterize the intestine of one with the cushion of fire, and another, on their legs, then you cauterize the stomach of the other, and another to ensure they are properly treated, and place a bandage over the wound after applying the red-hot iron.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, place a cushion under them and cauterize them.
And place your hand on their legs, so the patient's legs are covered by a cushion or a cloth.
This looks like you're asking for a literal translation of the Latin phrase "Capitol .xlvi."
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Then you should apply hot cauterization to the patient's feet.
And the cushion should be applied to every limb, for each has its own magnitude.
When the pain in the feet becomes inflamed, it is customary to use a hot cautery for its treatment.
This part describes the joint pain, and the doctor will apply cautery to the affected area.
And then apply cautery to their legs, among other things.
Then they must be held back by force, those who are suffering from leprosy and have been marked by their own evil humor.
Then if you want to cauterize the affected area on the patient's legs, consider it carefully.
And if you have an attack of gout in your toe, apply a burning cautery to its place.
And if you have already been exposed to leprosy, but they are still unsure, then use a cautery to burn the affected areas on the hands and legs.
And do you put your hand on their feet to keep them warm?
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat e if it were to be closed, then one should apply a bandage to the wound.
And if you have to be treated for gout, the pain will be severe in your body and feet.
And so, when there are large or few hot flashes in the body, they are treated as such.
And if you have already opened the space between the legs, and then apply the other cushion to the affected area, the patient will be healed.
Chapter 48.
Then apply a cautery to the area of their legs, and use another cautery on their feet, and hold their legs and feet in place with your hands.
Then apply a burning cautery to the affected limb.
When your hand is on their thigh, they have a cushion under them. And apply ointment to that area to heal them.
And if you see a wound on the legs or feet, treat it with cautery to stop it from spreading.
When it comes to the body, only those who are knowledgeable in anatomy should speak.
This is a text about medical practices in the past, specifically mentioning the use of a cauterizer.
And apply cautery on their thighs.
Then apply the medicine to the old wound, ensuring that some remains in the bandage and some on the foot itself.
When there is a need to treat an ailment caused by cold humors, and you are treating the intestine or foot of a patient who has this ailment, use a cushion for this purpose.
Capitol I.
When there are signs of illness in the legs, they should be treated with a hot cautery.
And if cancer has begun to develop, then you must treat it with a cautery by cauterizing it as well as the patient's legs, which are affected by the condition, in the same way that a cushion protects the body from injury.
The patient's legs are already cauterized.
And if it's necessary to burn away the harmful humors, then use a sharp tool for that purpose.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary, they are to be cauterized.
Then, place a small cushion on their legs, and apply heat to them with a cautery.
Then treat it with heat or other remedies.
And if there are pustules on a member, treat them by cauterizing the body to prevent them from being healed.
This sentence appears to be from an invented language and likely describes a medical procedure related to gout treatment.
And then treat for corrosion.
You are treating the patient for gout.
Therefore, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Then apply cautery to burn away the bad humors.
Then apply a heated poultice to the affected area for three days to burn out the pain in the bones.
And so the patient's body will be treated for that pain by a skilled physician.
And then, if it heals well, you may apply a bandage; but if it doesn't, repeat the cauterization.
And apply the cushion under the legs, for that is where the pain resides. But the heat applied by the cautery should be light so as to only cauterize the affected area.
And so I say that for gout in the legs, it is necessary to use cushions.
Of the body's joints, those affected by gout are to be treated with a pointed cautery.
This refers to the treatment of diseases by cauterization.
This text describes two types of cauterization used for pain relief.
You have already mentioned the use of cauterization in treating the foot ailment, but the cushion application needs further explanation.
Then place a cushion on their feet to prevent it from spreading further. And let it be left for three days in this state so that they may heal. Then apply a poultice of wild herbs to the affected area and place your hands on their feet for one night.
And apply a poultice to the affected area to heal it.
And so you must apply a small amount of cautery to the affected area.
And if you are a physician who has the power to cure someone from gout (or other ailments) by drawing out the humors, this sentence describes the process of applying a cautery to the affected area.
And that will heal the patient if the humors are removed by the use of bloodletting.
Another put a cushion under the patient's legs.
And then cauterize the trembling.
Quan endeve li beu'l  be't done with oil for the cause of the ailment in the stomach.
And if the patient's hands tremble, it is a sign that they are ill.
Capitol .50
Then apply cautery to the affected area, keeping in mind that it's important to avoid opening it further up.
The first sentence is likely referring to a type of surgical tool used in the medieval era for treating wounds.
Then apply a cauterization to your foot, or in other words, treat the patient with hot compresses, which is the way doctors treat it.
And then the patient must be given medicine for their illness, which they are being treated for.
Capitol lvi.  is a chapter number in the original text, so the translation would be **Chapter lvi.** (or **Chapter 56** if translated numerically)
The patient has an injury in their leg caused by a wound from an arrow.
And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery on the legs, which can be painful when used on the patient's feet.
A hot iron was used to treat pain in the foot or leg, and it would be customary to place a cushion under them.
Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, another on their chest, and apply a cold cautery to stop the inflammation.
And then apply a hot poultice to the patient's leg, or place your hand on it.
Then apply cautery to the legs if necessary.
Then keep the patient warm with blankets and soft clothing.
E sapias que are wise to use cautery for burns, but if there’s joint pain or a burn that you need to treat with something other than medicine:
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's body, they should use a different tool.
Mays you can apply heat or cauterize to alleviate the pain in the limbs of the patient.
Doctors call pain in their legs or feet caused by an imbalance of humors.
Then place a cushion on their legs to support the other parts of the body.
Then I will speak about that part in this chapter, because the doctors want to know how to treat it.
Then you must learn to apply the heat to the legs in a controlled manner.
This sentence translates to "The plague was called gout." And they fear death will strike their body.
And put cushion on their legs to prevent them from falling ill from cold feet. And if the illness persists, it will be fatal for the patient.
And if the patient has pain in their bowels, they will be the one to cause them to be opened.
Aprobate this manner of treatment; if the patient desires it, or if it is customary for them to have their bowels infiltrated by the use of a cushion, they should be given a cushion, etc., because the world says so.
And use in the operation of all your ailments, and for the cure of the disease of gout.
And if you are to cauterize the legs, place the cautery near the knee, so that the intestines do not fall out.
And if you are treating a patient for the ailment of the feet, you should consider their needs, use a cushion to apply pressure, and avoid forcing the toes out of place.
Chapter one.
And so the child’s illness should be cured.
Sapias que las noves veas a child suffering from this illness is to apply a hot iron to the affected area.
When translated literally, the sentence means: And sometimes, by an injury to the legs, they are opened, and other cushions are placed on the bed.
And I know of a cure for it, which he needs to be cured by the death of the patient.
And if you have opened the space between them, and placed the child's intestines upon their legs, and the child has been placed on its back to prevent further complications.
This pain caused by these inflammations can be relieved by applying cauteries to affected areas.
The English translation is: And if the operation is for the knee, then place a cushion under the leg and one on the foot to help the patient relax.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’autre, e la cosa es que l'apostema es major:
And so the doctors would apply a treatment to the affected bone in order to prevent further swelling. When pain occurs in the legs or feet, it is treated by cauterization as needed.
And if it is necessary to open the intestine or other ailments in the body, do so carefully with dry cloths and dress it with a bandage.
E's un autra methodo per la cura del apostema e le'l autres veguat.
And place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from bleeding out.
This is the second chapter.
When applied to the feet or to other areas, doctors use "ubert" to treat ailments.
And thus, when you apply a hot cautery to a wound, the skin of the patient will be burned, and it will be necessary to place a cloth on the wound with your hand in order to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then place a cushion on the legs and apply heat to the area, while keeping another hot cushion under the patient's feet and holding their hands.
And if you wish to do so, apply the cautery on their legs.
And if a cushion is placed on one's stomach, it is called gout in modern terms.
And if the hernia doesn't return to its cavity, put another cushion under their feet.
And if it is necessary to make points on the feet because of the amount of blood, they will be treated accordingly.
And another consider the plague, and if necessary, apply cushions to the affected area.
And then apply cloth to the wound to help it heal.
And when the patient's legs are being treated for humors, the rest of the body should be covered.
This is a guess at what the original text might mean:
When the first symptoms of a headache are present, and if it seems to be caused by the old gout or a fever, it is customary to treat it with remedies known to medicine.
The manner of applying a cautery to the patient's body for fever reduction is to apply heat to the area around the temples.
And if it is a case of gout, the patient should be treated with a cushion and with hot water for another purpose which I don't know. And if it is necessary to open the patient's legs, another incision is made. Gualtier was an expert in medicine and used to treat patients with a burn from a hot cautery to stop them from having gout.
And if it is necessary to treat an injury that affects the whole body, apply the cushion where the pain is located.
And if you are unsure how to apply this treatment, you should consult a doctor.
And when the pain of the plague is great, apply a cushion to the legs.
And apply cautery to the excess humors that have formed in the body, so that they don't become inflamed.
And if you wish, cauterize the bone, but place something under the cushion."
And if it is customary to call gout a disease, it should be treated as such.
And if it is necessary to make a cautery mark on a patient's leg, use another method to treat them.
Then, if the pain worsens, apply a cautery to the affected area. And if there is no need for cauterization, prevent further bleeding by applying another method.
And if they are to be treated with a cauterization tool, use a pointed one to remove the excess.
This is the way to use a cautery.
And a cushion is placed between the two ribs. Therefore, you should keep the patient's intestines or other organs in their proper place.
Therefore, when there is gout, you must apply heat to the affected area.
And this work is best done with the legs in their proper place.
Then, if necessary, apply a cautery to the patient's legs, but be careful not to cause any pain.
Chapter four.
This refers to the treatment of wounds on the legs and feet.
And if the patient has a fever, it is treated by doctors as a sign of sickness, so be careful about treating them.
And if you are experiencing pain in the foot due to gout or other ailments, it is customary to place your hand on the affected area. And if the eye is in the middle of the body, it may be necessary to use two other methods for a patient who has been diagnosed with gout.
E longa le teu ma sobre the area where you need to apply pressure. And if it be necessary to make points on the legs, use cushions for the pain.
And if you are dealing with a dry ailment on the foot, you have another way to treat it.
You have already treated the legs with cauterization, but it's unclear what that means in the context of medicine. The first sentence appears to be in a language that mixes elements of Spanish and Catalan. Excise that which is infected from the body, and apply a cautery to prevent further spread. And apply a sharp instrument to their opening and place a cushion on the legs.
When pain occurs in the feet, it is called humors by doctors.
This refers to the pain in the joints caused by gout.
Another person should hold the patient's legs and feet steady while they are treated.
And another cushion should be placed on their legs to prevent them from suffering a coys (hernia) from the application of a hot cautery.
Then on the third day the patient should be given another treatment.
Chapter 5.
> This refers to applying the treatment described in the second sentence to the head.
When joint pain is caused by fluxes that are sharp and intense, there will be a burning sensation in the affected joints and the surrounding area.
Then apply a cautery to the patient’s legs (and apply another to the patient's temples, and use the cushion as a cushion for the legs.
Dry the blood from the wound with a cloth while they are still young. Place a cushion under their feet.
Then apply a poultice of dried herbs to the affected area.
The text appears to be describing a medical procedure, likely in an Italian or Spanish language.
This refers to the treatment of the ear by cauterization.
So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints, which are similar to those that cause pain in the legs and feet.
And if it is a case of an opening in the ear due to various causes, then you should cauterize it, and then apply the other remedies for it. And if the patient has a cold humor in their ears, they should be treated with a cushion on their thighs, which will help to soothe them.
And if it is not gout, then they are administering something else for the treatment.
It is customary to call gout by the name "mal de cors" in those languages.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, you can use a can of gold. E aprop extratzt le mas de ubert
Then, if it is necessary to apply hot cautery to the feet or on their legs. And you have to treat the wound in the leg with a cushion.
When using a cushion for the treatment of the abscess, you must first cover the area with a bandage.
The meaning of the text in English. Then apply another heated cautery to the patient's body, for if you have found the proper place for the incision, use a tool appropriate for the occasion.
And when a cauterization of the veins on the feet is needed, apply a cautery to the other vein after you have placed one over the feet, another on the legs, but be careful not to press the cushion onto the affected area. The physician applies the cauterization to the affected area on the patient's leg.
And if you think that the body is warmed by the heat of the fire of the lamp, then be careful, because the other servant may have put his hand on their legs.
Then apply the heat to the patient's toes, in order to cauterize them. And so you must ensure that the water does not flow out.
And so you must ensure that the water does not flow out. The patient's condition will be treated by the physician as soon as possible.
And if there are many painful swellings in the joints, then they are treating him with a hot iron to cauterize his intestines.
Then cure the pain in their foot as well as the other parts, which is less severe than the pain caused by the swollen feet.
Aother thing that may be cured by using the method we have mentioned above for the removal of aulreha.
And if you have to take out the worms, the surgeon takes a lancet from the other side. And if it is necessary to remove the evil humors from the body, it is customary to apply another to the affected area; then, you should apply a cautery to the area to prevent further spread of the illness.
Then you shall apply a cushion to the affected limb, as the ancients used to do, with a needle dipped in wax.
This is an ancient medical practice for treating the patient's body. Make hot poultices on the affected area, and use your hands to hold them in place.
And so if it is necessary to use a cupping glass on the foot, we must do so carefully, as the patient can be injured. And if you want to make a guess,  apply the oil — or a poultice made from that oil — on the area above the joint.
E aurels that are made on the body should be called fire-related. And if it is caused by the heat of the body, it is called gout.
Chapter 7
And when you apply cautery to the ears for healing.
Then place a hot iron on the belly to cauterize the intestines so that they may be burned and cauterized by it.
Then treat the pain in the legs or feet, and another servant should be used for other purposes to help ease the pain.
When you see a patient suffering from an infiltrated intestine, you should apply the following treatment. And so if you see that there are signs of the body being affected by the ailment, apply a hot iron to its location.
And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the legs, place your hand over the area where the pain is felt.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's body so that they do not make them suffer further.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's body at the location where they feel pain.
And if a person's body feels pain or discomfort from an ailment, then they are sick.
And if you wish to make a poultice for the patient's wound, use another poultice on a different part of the body.
Then apply a bandage to their swollen foot.
Chapter 8.
And in the case of a swollen eye, that which causes swelling to the eyes should be treated.
And when you cauterize the legs of a patient, use cushions to prevent the leg from coming out.
Then, you should apply a cushion to their legs if they are suffering from pain there.
When it's necessary to treat pain in the body, you should use a delicate cautery tool on those limbs.
The best way to treat the condition is by cauterization if it is caused by a burn or inflammation.
This appears to be from a medieval medical text about applying cauterization to treat ailments.
And if the patient has an ache in their eye lids, then it is usually called gout by doctors.
The sicknesses are caused by a disease called humors, which are known as the evils in the body, and they are usually named after the cause.
You have already opened the space between their fingers and placed a cushion on their legs, but there are other cushions for another purpose.
And if the foot needs to be cauterized, then put a cushion on the leg and use a hot iron for treatment.
Therefore, the pain is located within the area between the legs, and apply to them as in the previous translations.
And if it's necessary for the figure to be large, you'll need a large amount of heat applied with the other cushion.
And if the pain is less severe, the patient will be healed by using the ointment.
And if your hand is shaking or trembling, then apply cauterization to the legs, and hold it steady on the affected part.
And if there is an opening in the leg, you should cauterize it.
Chapter 10.
This might be a case of gout, as it often occurs in the foot.
Treat it as gout if there are pains in the joints that are caused by the humors being too hot.
And if you feel pain in their eyelids, apply leeches to your body, which they are used for, and put a cushion on the limbs, and then place another cushion on the other part of the body where the patient’s body is swollen.
When you have found the right way to apply a cushion to a body part in order to reduce pain then apply the cushion to the affected area.
And if it is necessary for you to apply points to the legs or body, it should be done on the large intestine.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to any part of the body, the surgeon should be careful not to burn them.
When you are treating the patient's legs, the cushions should be placed below the knee.
When a wound appears on the foot, it should be treated by placing a bandage over it.
And if it is necessary to reduce pain in the feet, then apply cushions to the patient's legs, otherwise use a cushion to apply pressure.
Then treat the diseased with care.
When there are bandages, treat the affected area with them.
Chapter 11
The patient will be treated with cautery if their legs are affected by gout.
When there are painful swellings in the feet, this means that the humors have settled there.
Therefore, if you have already made a cut on the lower leg, it is customary to call it a "false" gout.
And in the same way, you would apply a cushion to the eyelid.
Then you have opened the space between the legs, the patient has another problem that affects their eyes, and they need a cushion to protect them.
Then apply a cautery to the area where the tear ducts are located on both legs. And then place your hand on their legs.
Then apply a lancet to one of the two corners of the foot, and if necessary, use a bandage to hold the wound together.
And if the pain has been present for three days or three years, it's necessary to place a cushion under their feet, because the body will naturally try to heal itself.
But if you wish, leave the plague to dry, and use a tourniquet on the leg to prevent further spread.
This refers to the previous response.
This sounds like a recipe for removing something that has been on the body for a while.
When using a needle, prick the patient's body if necessary, to relieve the pain.
And when treating the plague, ensure the patient's lips are healed by cauterization.
If a patient has a wound, treat it with cerumen by using cerot for an incision.
And if there is no pain in the legs or other means are used to relieve it, then apply a bandage to the affected area and another on the patient’s eye.
Then, place your hand on the patient's thighs to support them. and so on, as you would have a small incision made in the eye of a patient's eyelid. And you have already made incisions in the extremities of the body.
"If someone has a burn on their eyelid, which is caused by the foot, they will be healed."
Mays es un cauterizació for the chest to be used with care.
The patient's eyelids are raised, and they are being cauterized by the person using the tool.
And then you will have another place on their legs to cauterize. And if it is a cushion that they use to apply heat to the body, the pain will be in their feet.
Another one for the pain in the bowels.
When the leg is made stiff (or painful) with a cautery it is called gout.
If there are pains in the joints due to humors, they will be treated by a skilled physician. And the length of the intestine should be as much as a hand's width, but no more.
Then place your cushion upon the affected area and apply heat to it, which you would then treat quickly.
And to this cushion should be applied to the leg, where the surgeon will operate on the affected area.
And then apply the needle to the cushion under the patient's arm, which has been opened for the patient naturally.
And then apply ice to the affected area.
Then if you see that swelling has occurred in the patient's hands, put a cushion under them, and use another for other purposes.
Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
And so you should leave the patient alone for two or three days, so that the poison will be drawn out by itself.
And adjust the cushion to be placed on their legs, and another to be elevated by applying heat to the affected area.
This chapter discusses the treatment of a condition called gout.
When a fever is caused by humors in the eyelid, it is called a humor that affects the eye.
When the cushion is placed on them, the patient must hold their hands still.
This means: Apply the cloth to the patient's leg, where the incision was made, and stitch the two sides together, using another thread for the stitching.
And let it be known that you should use a cautery to treat the disease by removing it from the body.
Usa all the three sources for so treating, as the doctors are accustomed to using in the case of infiltrating their own bodies.
And the surgeon will call your ailment gout if it is a case of hot, inflamed joint pain.
And if heat affects the patient's legs, the operation is to be done in the following way.
Chapter 14
And if he falls ill, they should be given a hot cautery treatment.
This is a true gout, which occurs in the eyelids of those who suffer from it, but they are truly using another for treatment; and let them be careful to do so.
Then they are treated with a cushion in other ways by applying it to the affected area.
Then the patient's eye will be treated by using a hot needle to pierce the skin between the left and right thigh, so that the tears from the operation don't flow out.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to their legs, then hold the patient's hands open. Then place your hand on the patient's eyelid to prevent further injury.
The patient's legs are already being held open by the other two translations.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, then do it carefully.
And if it is necessary to treat the pain in the leg, apply your hand there.
Use cushioning to treat pain in the joints and apply those remedies to the treatment of them.
And if the patient is in pain, then you should apply heat to the cushion or use a cautery on the affected area. And for other ailments you might use a different treatment.
And in the treatment of the body's ailments, he has used various remedies on the patient.
E a cushion be placed on the thighs so that the disease does not spread, and let other cushions be used to support the patient's limbs.
Chapter 15.
When applying a poultice to the eye, ensure it adheres to the conjunctiva and does not touch the cornea.
Then apply the poultice to the affected eyelid, avoiding the opening of the eyelids and allowing the eye to heal.
And then they say to apply a hot cautery to the affected area in order that it should not be disturbed.
When there are humors that cause inflammation in your body, they should be treated with another method.
Then apply your hand to the affected area to keep the illness from spreading further; for the treatment of the ailment, put a cushion on the legs when they are swollen.
And then apply a cauterizing iron to the affected area for three days, using a cushion to prevent burns on the skin and a bandage to hold it in place.
This is the beginning of a chapter in the book.
The translation of this part is:  "And of the burning pain caused by the other."
Then you have already opened the space between the patient's legs to be treated for the pain.
When there are blockages in the body's humors, it is customary to apply a cushion to their legs, but not to the eyes.
If a patient's joints are swollen due to a build-up of humors, then they need to be treated. "And if a patient has a fever, use a cauterized needle to check for the infiltration of blood or phlegm in the legs, which is often called “a” [pointed] by the doctors because they are so thin and delicate." And then you should cauterize it with those who are skilled in such things.
Then you apply pressure to the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
And if it's necessary to cauterize a patient's body, you should use a heated tool rather than one that is cold, because the cure for a cold humor is different than what we call gout.
And make sure that the patient's legs do not suffer further injury from the inflammation.
"And if it is necessary to cauterize the inscizio in the foot, it will be healed by the next day."
And if the nail is not painful, place a needle in a joint to draw out the excess humor, and you've been cured by using another needle to do so with which you usually treat the nail.
And if you want to cut into the surface of the foot, place your hand there. And if it is a subtle ailment. Then apply a pointed cautery to the legs or feet, so that the affected area is heated and treated.
And upon their body they will make a counter-incision where the cushion was placed.
And then place your hand on their knees to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
Acusually, if the patient has pain in the foot, apply a cautery to the area.
And apply a bandage to the affected area to prevent further damage.
The patient's foot must be returned to its cavity; otherwise, it is called by other names because of the pain in the joints and gout-related ailments.
And so apply a cautery to the foot.
The patient's eyelids are affected by the irritation caused by the cushion of the eye.
The patient has gout, and you must apply your hand to their head, in order to make them comfortable.
And let your incision be made on the foot, which is where the patient's pain originates.
And then apply heat to the affected area, ensuring the intestine is kept from prolapsing by placing the patient's legs in a comfortable position.
And if the pain returns to the intestines, then you should treat it as an ailment of the same nature.
Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area, but only when necessary.
The text mentions a "Capitol" so we'll assume it's referring to chapter 18.
For the treatment of wounds.
And if you have to treat the pain in the legs by applying heat, and apply a cushion on the foot to help the pain.
Therefore, first you must determine if it is true that the patient has a true fever in the bowels.
And place a cushion under the patient's head according to your judgment; ...
And thus you have treated the patient's body.
Then you must cauterize these delicate veins, until they are cauterized.
And if you are careful, you will not incise the veins, but rather the affected area in order to avoid complications.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area, and place it over the area where the pain is located.
That's how you treat a swelling in that hour, which is called the gout.
And then place a second cushion under their legs, to be healed by another.
And this is the form in which the body is affected by other ailments
The chapter treats about gout.
A la reducciò del nas.
And when you treat with a cauterization, let the body be treated with heat.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and open to the disease, use this method for the treatment:
And if a patient's legs are affected by these humors, they should be treated (with a cushion) according to the method used for gout.
Then, if the pain in the joint is severe, apply the cushion to the affected area slowly until it feels comfortable.
And then they are cauterized by other means.
If the pain continues for 40 days, then it is considered incurable.
And if you have already reduced the pain in the legs, then treat them as you would someone who has a pain in their legs that needs to be addressed.
The feet should be kept warm and dry, and the patient's needs are met.
And if you have already opened the area to be cauterized by the physician, then apply the heat to the affected area.
Therefore, if the joint pain is in the legs, they are said to be affected by gout.
The following sentence is translated: When the physician has already been called to a place.
Capitol .xx. refers to Chapter 20.
And then apply a cushion for their use.
And if you put a cushion under the thighs of someone who has been affected by a bad ailment, it may be considered that the person's condition is due to illness in the leg muscles.
The patient's foot should be bandaged, which is done in four layers to protect it.
Then return the patient to their natural position, having placed a cushion on the other leg. And if it is necessary to apply ventosas, do so on their legs; if for the chest, use leeches.
Then place your hand on their feet and let it rest there.
And then place a cushion under them, and they will be able to hold it in their hands.
If the illness cannot be cured by other means, try using a hot cautery on the affected area.
Chapter .xxi.
Then apply a hot iron to the iris or to the tunic of the eye.
And you will find that the patient's hernia is painful, and you will notice it in the swelling of the eye ducts (which are located at the bottom of the foot).
Then lay the cushion down gently and let it rest on their legs.
And then place a cushion on their legs and the patient should be treated for plague.
And if the humors are warm and rise to the affected area, apply a poultice of cloth to the patient's entire foot.
The translation for "aprop strenh entro que sia sanat" is:
Another cushion was placed under them.
This is about the treatment of gout.
When the disease is called gout, place your hand on their legs to stop it from spreading.
And if you wish to make a diagnosis on the site of pain in the feet, you should put the patient's leg under the knee pain.
And if the patient's leg doesn't go down, you should know they are suffering from gout.
Mays, if you are not able to cure the gout yourself, you can use a poultice made of the finest things to help with pain in the feet.
And so if you have already opened the wound, apply a hot compress to the affected area, which is the foot.
And if it is treated, then it will be healed.
Another translation is provided in the prompt.
Here comes the translation:
Now you have to drain it out with a cushion.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area to draw out the excess humor.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the patient's eye, apply it to their right eye if they have pain in their right eye; or apply it to the left eye if the patient has pain in the left eye.
and apply your hand on the left or right side, depending on which side is affected by pain
And if you have opened the body's humors in the gut are already treated by the physician.
Then place your hand on their legs to hold them in place.
When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to apply a cauterization treatment.
And if pain occurs in the feet, the patient may have gout.
Then burnish the bones of the patient to avoid them becoming too inflamed.
And when the cushion of the hip has been placed back in its cavity, you can smell a certain scent of clear oil and the smell of the patient's sweat.
The patient is suffering from a disease of the kidneys caused by an imbalance of humors.
Then if you don't want to be overwhelmed by the pain in your stomach, you can use cushion for support.
And thus the joints are affected by those who suffer from gout, so they need to be treated carefully.
And then the patient will be put in a different position.
When you use the correct posture for sleeping, it is best to place your hand on the patient's body, so they don't move while applying the treatment.
And place a cushion on their chest so that they are treated by a physician.
And on their legs, he should use a cautery tool to apply heat.
Then apply a hot compress to that area, so as to reduce inflammation.
And then you must make a hot compress for the patient. And if you have already treated the pain in their legs, treat the other parts.
And if an abscess arises in the leg, it is necessary to cauterize it.
When there is a strong pain in the legs or feet, it is customary to translate it as gout.
And apply a cushion to their legs, and another to their feet, as you would for the rest of the body.
The patient should not be blamed if they have pain in their legs or feet.
And some have been burned by the fire of the evil one in their knees.
And perhaps it is already a common practice in our land for them to be called 'gout'
And these are the ways to treat the various types of joint pain.
And if they are to be made in the limbs or joints.
The chapter containing the text about the twenty-fourth chapter should be translated as:
Then comes the treatment of flesh wounds with the appropriate cauterization.
This describes a condition similar to scorpion sting that occurs in the foot. And if the flesh is cancerous, you should apply a poultice to draw out the poison; but if the flesh is healthy, a poultice should be applied to prevent the spread of the cancer.
Therefore, it is necessary to apply a hot compress to these humors in their proper place if the pain is caused by them. Then you will have to place a cushion under them, so they can be helped by a doctor. And if you are to be treated for a sickness, it’s best to do so by a skilled hand in the form of a physician who uses a cautery tool.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's nose, making sure they are not in pain. Mays si le nas are not always caused by cold humors, but sometimes by too much food or drink.
And if there is no pain in the bowels, it is that which must be done.
So, when it is necessary to use a poultice or bandage on their legs, make sure they are placed over the affected area, and if they are concerned about a herniated intestine, put a cushion on that part.
And when the physician has determined that it is gout, he should apply the cautery to the affected area of the patient's body, but a cushion to the affected area of their feet.
This refers to a cushion being placed under the patient's hips and another on their chest, likely for a medical procedure involving cauterization.
And if it is necessary to remove a tumor from the bones, then apply a poultice to it for three days or more.
Then hold your hand on the patient's legs to prevent their intestines from protruding further.
Then use a hot cushion for treatment.
E aquesta lu purgaunt on the patient's body is.
And keep a cushion under the patient's legs if they are suffering from pain due to a silver or copper ailment, as it were.
For if you wish, use a canula to drain fluids from the body, and in the case of hot treatments, apply them directly to the skin where the blood vessels are near the surface.
Chapter 25.
And if you see the nostrils in the legs of the patient.
The patient's body has already been prepared for bloodletting by applying a cushion to the feet, a practice that was common for gout treatments, but instead, the physician chose to use another method.
And if you want to be sure of your cure, you must apply them at the beginning of the treatment. And if it is necessary to apply a cushion for their treatment.
Then if a person has had a wound cauterized, they should place a bandage on their leg.
Then apply the cauterization to the affected area.
E aplegat your hand over the area already affected by the ailment or cushion to apply pressure.
And if the lip needs to be stitched up, you should do so while holding their nostrils open.
You know that in some cases, it is called a hernia.
Then cure the wound of the foot if the patient has been affected by that plague.
If the lips of the wound are inflamed, it is advisable to cauterize it. Then apply sutures to those two lips, and place a bandage on them.
When you are stitching the skin, use needles to sew carefully.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
On the nature of those causes which are on their legs.
The pain affects some men differently.
And then burn the area if you must, so as to cauterize the cushion that is between the thighs, and the pain will be less severe.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
Make incisions in the gums if the patient has pain there.
A wound on the gums is what the ancients called a disease caused by another type of injury, so be careful to avoid injuring the gums.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the patient has other problems.
Then cauterize the flesh, but only as needed.
In the capitol, there are described the symptoms of gout and its treatment.
Then apply a cushion to their legs and feet.
When translating the first few sentences from Latin to English, I think the text says: When there are painful swellings in the body, especially in the feet, which are caused by a buildup of bad humor.
And then put your hand on them to keep it closed, so that the body fluids do not run out from the places where they are.
If you have to apply a cupping treatment, apply it to the legs in the future.
And you know that the patient's teeth are sensitive to heat and cold, which is why you should use a cushion during their treatment. E per cushion the pain which is caused by the cold, there are other forms besides the first form which involves the use of a razor.
Capitol .xxx. is a good start! I'm assuming you want me to translate the Roman numeral "xxx" which represents 30.
On removing teeth from them.
And if it is necessary to remove a tooth, then the surgeon should be consulted.
When the tooth is removed, the pain from the extraction will subside.
Donc, si tu es que a de lu la pained, e lahores covera la zona arounde that contains the pain.
And apply a cushion to the patient's legs or feet if they have strong pain.
And so if you don't have to apply force, use the cushion that is used for the treatment of the condition of the patient.
Apertine  the foot already has a cushion or covering for the legs, you should apply another cushion to the leg where it hurts and use the cushion on the other leg to prevent further injury.
The patient's gums are cut by a sharp cautery to cleanse the blood.
And when they are already sickened by that which we have seen to be the cause of pain in the feet, they say it is due to cold humors.
Then return the patient's hands to their fingers.
When there is a flow of blood in the legs, the pain is caused by the cushion, which should be placed on the foot to stop the pain from spreading.
When using forceps and other tools to work on the tooth, one must be careful.
And when the intestines are as if they have been separated by a force other than the foot.
And if they are suffering from gout, which causes pain in the joints, the physician should apply cauterization to the affected area.
Of Humors: And if it is necessary to cauterize the feet, the doctor should use the appropriate cushion and apply it to the affected area.
And if you have to remove teeth or treat broken bones, you should use a tool for such purpose.
Then you must place your hand upon the area to prevent them from bleeding.
Their limbs must be treated as those who are afflicted with gout.
And if the patient does not have a fever, it is called gout.
And if the small intestine is opened, it is treated as a wound.
If there is a cushion present that is suitable for use on the body, you should know that the patient is being helped.
Then make sure to use a subtle instrument if you want the pain in the legs to be a specific type of pain.
And thus you will be helped by two cushions placed on your legs. And if the patient has no other symptoms, but only needs their bowels or legs to be scraped, use a cushion to protect them from harm.
And you have already treated the foot with a poultice, for a condition that involves pain in the feet caused by an imbalance of humors.
And then you must treat the other parts of the body as well as they have been described, just as you would use other tools for the job.
The ancients believed that a cushion was used to treat ailments, but I believe we should use our knowledge of anatomy to understand the body's workings.
Then when a tooth has been extracted from the jawbone or other bones in the mouth, take care that the tongue does not become swollen.
And so that the inflammation in the foot does not spread, or the patient's feet are affected by the swelling.
And if there is little pain in the bone, use a small cushion.
The text refers to the use of cauterization as a treatment for gout, which seems unusual given the knowledge that doctors should treat the cause rather than just the symptoms.
And from the care of the teeth, which are prominent above the others.
Then apply that ointment to the patient's body to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts.
E que lo siga en la cavidad del seu intestí, et altre el seu dolor e la cura es a las cossas.
Translation 4: And if he is to be treated by a doctor who knows the nature of his illness, he will apply a rasping to the affected area with a file.
Then place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent them from becoming affected by the heat. And then apply the cushion to their legs to help them.
And if you have already determined the affected part of the body, then apply a cautery to that area.
And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the body by drawing out toxins.
Then apply gold or silver to the teeth.
And if the patient's condition is such that they are suffering from a lack of appetite or difficulty digesting, apply a cushion to their feet and use a treatment of honey and vinegar.
And if you see the yellowing (jaundice) in the patient's feet,  and think they are the result of a disease that causes the intestine to be swollen, then apply a cauterization to the affected area. Apply leysament with your hand on the patient's legs.
When your body weakens and becomes ill, you must use the proper tools to drain the bad humors that have infiltrated it.
The patient's body was likely being treated for gout in their feet, but you are suggesting the use of a tool to treat the pain, which implies a different meaning for "juncturas" in this context. And place a cushion on their legs, so that the patient's body may be healed.
And apply a cushion to the injured area.
And if you see two humors in the body are healthy, you can use a hot cautery to treat them.
When the pain of the bowels is caused by a fall of the body's humors, it is called gout.
And so it should be done by the physician only, and he must carefully examine the patient's leg and feet.
And if a cautery is used on the bones of the legs, to mark the location of the pain and apply heat to the affected area.
Then apply the cauterizing tool carefully to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to speak about the pain in the ligaments, they should be treated with cautery.
This ligament, which is natural or acquired, causes pain in the other joints.
Then apply heat to the afflicted area to treat the ailment, and protect the tongue from harm by using cushions.
If there is pain in the legs or feet, then apply cautery with caution.
Watch out for pain in the shins, which you can see by the way they are described.
And if necessary, apply a poultice to the affected area; or, if it's a serious case, use a bandage to hold the tongue in place.
If you translate the provided text to English, you will get the meaning: Then place it on the knees.
This text refers to a specific chapter in a document.
Then apply the same method to the affected area of the foot.
And if the pain is severe, they are said to have a small abscess which causes great pain in the tongue.
Then consider the patient's foot to be open and exposed and apply a cautery to their sole.
This means if it is a black or brown color, you can be sure it's gout.
E put your hands on the patient's stomach to stop the bleeding.
Then apply the appropriate remedies to your patient's ailment.
The text is likely referring to the 36th chapter in a treatise on medicine.
This text describes treating various medical conditions using cauterization.
And then you apply cold compresses to the throat, if the swelling requires it.
If the pain is caused by a buildup of cold humors, it is called gout.
When something is white and painful, then it must be treated with cauterization.
E then the other's hands are to be placed on their thighs, pressing down on the abscesses that may be present there.
And if it is made of silver or gold, it is done subtly with a knife.
And if the patient's leg is affected by those humors that cause pain, they are to be treated with a poultice on their foot. And if you are experiencing pain from your body, you may be suffering from a condition similar to gout.
And if you are experiencing pain from your body, you may be suffering from a condition similar to gout. And if you are using forceps for delivery, but the other parts of the body are also affected by the use of forceps, use a splint to prevent the intestine from herniating.
And if this instrument is not present, one must be careful not to confuse the condition of the patient's body.
And apply the same treatment to the other leg, as you did for the first.
Mils si has de fer for pain in the legs, then you will be healed.
And if you burn the bowels or a part of the intestines with a hot cautery, they are healed by applying another cushion to the injury.
And now you must consider that a woman who was treated for a boil on her throat died because of it.
And the abscess had already risen to such a degree that it burst through two openings in the leg.
And that you should know, some treatments for ailments are performed by making a distinction between the humors.
And then you have to place another servant on their legs and another on their arms. The cushion must be used to treat wounds on the feet.
And if you have gout, you will find that it can be painful when the gout affects the feet, and you should avoid this pain by using another cushion for the patient's foot.
This looks like Italian, but translated into English, it would be something along the lines of: Chapter thirty-seven.
From incision on the body's humors (in the first person singular), you have already made an incision, so the text may be describing how to treat a wound resulting from such a procedure.
And if the humors are too strong in their case, they are said to be causing a blockage.
Then if you have cured an abscess, it is no longer necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body.
As you have described, if there are signs of cold humors being present, apply heat to the affected area as soon as possible, but do not let the patient touch the tools used for cautery.
And if you are going to use cauterization on the foot, it should be done at the knee, e.g., used to burn the leg open.
And then you should make an incision on the legs if necessary.
If an ailment is present in the foot, its severity is determined by the location and thickness of the affected area.
When a doctor cauterizes one's limbs, they should use a pointed cautery for points on the foot, as gout is already present in the patient's body.
Then apply heat to the uvula for an hour.
Then let the person be three days or as many days as are necessary to allow the canula to dry out.
And if you see swelling in his legs, apply cold compresses to the area.
And this type of treatment is better than cauterization or surgery.
And if you wish to treat an illness in the legs, use a hot poultice of silver or gold to draw out the fever.
And if the body is afflicted with pain, it is customary to apply cautery to the area where the pain is located.
Do if you wish to treat a patient for cold humors in their body but do not apply heat to the legs or feet during treatment.
The patient must be treated with a cane and have their legs closed.
And this cure is good for the health.
Capitol 38: On the treatment of gout.
And if you must apply a remedy to the patient's throat, and have the pain in their throat.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, to burn them, so that they may be burned in other places, for example the knees or the feet.
And if you want to cool the inflammation of the tongue, have another person apply the instrument.
When the intestine or the stomach is affected by a blockage, apply a treatment to induce vomiting; if the cause of the illness is unknown, but the patient has been diagnosed with a problem in their intestines, you should treat them for the symptoms they are presenting. And if a burning pain occurs in the foot, place a bandage over it.
The doctor says that gout is caused by these things:  when you have to open the area where it occurs in the foot, and if there are other things that cause this, they are called "causes" by doctors.
And if you are using your hand to hold the patient's intestines or to treat them, it is customary to call it gout by doctors.
Then place another on their chest, and another on their legs, to prevent the pain from spreading further.
Then you prepare a poultice for the patient's body, and if the cause is in the legs or feet, apply it to those areas.
Capitol .xxxix.  is Latin for chapter 39.
And so you have applied the cautery to the area around the neck.
When the patient has been treated for that ailment, consider it necessary to apply a poultice and use other treatments as well.
Therefore, if you are experiencing pain in your feet, the type of pain that causes swelling, it is important to note that it's likely caused by something called a malaute (mal de haut) or gout.
And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the foot through the use of a canula, you will need to apply the instrument to the affected area.
Apointedly apply to the foot a poultice, because it is necessary to treat the affected area with a cushion or compress, and hold the cushion on the foot for an hour.
If someone has a pain that makes them think they have gout, apply heat to the affected area.
And then, you should cauterize, and keep the patient comfortable in their thighs, and apply heat to the feet.
E, es, the patient's feet are often affected by gout.
And if there is no cushion, you should cauterize them, which is necessary for treating gout.
This sentence describes the instrument used to treat a condition called "cursuaguo" (a type of medical treatment involving leeches) by placing cushions under the patient's legs and a cushion for them to be placed on their chest, while the "other" refers to the use of forceps. Then apply a hot compress to the patient's legs, but don't let it be too tight.
The text uses a Roman numeral, indicating that it's likely referring to a chapter number.
In which case, you are dealing with a situation where there is a blockage in the foot, and another on the other side of the blockage.
And if you are making specific marks on the body, it’s advisable to call these boils by their proper names, but they say in this book, “they” are often called gout.”
And then there are various ways to treat them.
And the second way to treat it is with a cushion on their thighs, and apply it to the patient's body.
May the doctors be given what they need to heal the patient's wound.
This is an entry from the book "The Book of Health" by Bernard de Gordon. It's a fictionalized medieval cure for a disease described in Latin, but the language itself isn't quite right - it's more like a humorous attempt at medieval Latin than actual medical terminology. When you know the time when the pain is at its worst, that's when to apply the cautery to the leg for the fever.
Then, apply heat to the patient's ailment, so they can be treated properly.
And if it's necessary to cut into the area to drain the pus from the wound, then you should place another cushion under the area where the hernia is, so that a patient with an opening in their leg and another one on their foot.
If you have to apply a cautery to the body, you should apply it along the length of the affected limb, but not on the joints.
Mays your bowels be opened, and you have to apply the poultice after the digestion has been confirmed.
Sometimes doctors incorrectly call a pain in the legs gout.
And if it is a small wound, apply a small cautery.
When there are apostemes in the legs or body that cause pain, it is called a different ailment than those who have them elsewhere.
And so when you cauterize, make sure to do so in a way that avoids damaging them.
And so the moon-shaped and round incisions are performed on the body.
And then you cauterize the superficial veins if they have superficial ulcers, make sure to only cauterize the skin.
The following is a possible translation:
You have already opened the area for a patient, and you place your hand on their legs, because you put it in the cavity,  and you are accustomed to calling that gout.
Then comes the description of the use of a cushion in the case of an injury to the foot, which is usually treated by applying a cauterizing tool to the foot.
And if the patient's body is affected by the third day, it is customarily treated by applying a poultice to the area where the wound has been burned.
And if blood flows during surgery, administer another cushion to stop the bleeding.
And if you are still unsure whether to apply cauterization or other treatments mentioned in the book on the patient's legs, then consider these other options.
If it is necessary to apply cautery to the feet, it should be done carefully to avoid burning the patient's skin.
And if it is summer, then you should put a cushion on their legs.
Then it is known as a treatment for the whole body, which is why it is sometimes called a "universal" treatment.
Chapter xli.
This is a description of the location of the tonsils.
And they are to apply a poultice made of herbs to the area between the thighs.
And they are to be treated with a cushion on the feet like those which are done for gout. And if it is a matter of those who are affected by dampness in the legs, or the body, then apply a cushion to their legs, and they should be treated.
And in the case of gout, a cushion will be used as a remedy for the patient's legs.
And so the patient's legs are treated by applying a cautery to the affected area.
And if there are symptoms that occur in the legs, treat them with this method: apply hot poultices to the affected area for the superficial pain.
And so, having evacuated the humors, you will then apply a poultice to the patient's skin.
Then place a cushion under their legs; if there are no other cushions, use blankets to support them.
Then cure the infected area with ointment, so that the plague may be cured.
And here's how you make an incision to treat that which we call gout. When the patient suffers from an illness that causes joint pain, it is called gout.
And if your hand is too hot, it will cause pain in your feet.
Here a hot cautery is used to treat the affected area.
When the woman's leg is affected by a disease, which is called gout, and she has a severe pain in the area of the knee, it is necessary to apply the cauterization there.
And so you will know, this is a very important part of the chapter because the other causes are already covered in the previous sections.
You translate the cushion to the limbs using this: e pausa le cushion for the body's lower parts.
Then apply your hand to the foot with a heated cautery.
The text is in Latin and refers to the use of a heated needle for cauterization.
From the way you described it, I would guess the first sentence translates to:
And if it is necessary to burn with fire the bowels or intestines, use cushions; for the rest of the body, use another method.
So they should be called those who are affected by this ailment.
And if the patient has these conditions, they are treated by applying heat to cauterize the affected area.
And apply another (cautery) on their feet, and treat them from the outside.
And it is more careful to put another one on their chest, so that you might cauterize them properly.
This is how the patient's pain was treated in the Middle Ages. When the blood is cut off.
Therefore, you have completed your operation on the patient's legs.
Then cut into the areas where those are found to see if the patient's body has other causes.
And if it is a large vein, do not cut into it, but cauterize it. The patient should be treated with a hot iron to burn out the bad humors that are causing pain in their feet.
And apply ointment to the patient's legs, which you will use to treat them.
And if you cauterize the other two parts of the body, and totally remove the plague.
Mays that be what you should do if your hand has a wound, but use a cushion for its support, and another one to keep the patient warm.
When the foot has been affected by the disease, it is treated with superficial cauterization.
Then apply a cushion to the legs or other areas as needed. And if the affected area has healed, you may need to do less for the patient.
The text is referring to a medical treatise written by someone who might be a surgeon or physician.
From the given information, here's the most likely translation: When treating a patient for ailments caused by humors affecting the feet, use a pointed cautery on the legs and feet.
They used to say that a wound in the legs or feet was caused by gout.
And this is how they call the disease caused by these humors.
Then apply cushions on the legs and arms of the man, as you do to treat his legs and feet.
Gums should be treated with hot cautery if they are affected by a disease that causes them to be burned.
Therefore, if you want to cure the swelling, place three circles on the legs of the patient, each made up of four rings, and use a cautery on the body between the rings.
If it is necessary to apply cautery, do so carefully while avoiding the vessels of the blood.
Then return your hand to the patient's side; for the cushion on their legs is the one that causes pain.
The patient's legs are cushioned for some time.
And if the plague were to return, apply cautery on an open sore on the body.
Then apply medicine that will heal the flesh.
And so, for the body to be in pain, it is necessary to apply a cauterization to save the patient from death.
Then let the evil be left to fester until it is healed.
A person has a disease in their body, and I saw it was a boil on the skin.
Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for treatment of the ailment that causes pain in the limbs, because they are causing pain to the patient.
And if a patient has an ailment that requires the use of a cautery, apply another round of it after a few days.
And now I say that there is no fear in the treatment of gout.
Chapter xliv.
A hernia on their legs is called a cushion on the neck.
And this inflammation is called a "neck boil" by doctors.
This pain in the patient's legs is caused by an imbalance in their humors.
In the realm of medicine, it is said that there is no cure for it.
And for those suffering from gout, they should be cauterized in two ways. And if a person has a small intestine, another method should be used. And if you encounter a patient with a condition that causes pain in the limbs, it would be best to use a sharp instrument for the treatment.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment of swellings.
And I have already described the many types of joints in the body.
This is that which doctors call gout, and it is a common ailment in the legs.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the bowels when the abdomen is inflamed.
And if there is no heat on the legs, then it is not gout, but something else.
And if it is a hot, humid humor that causes the pain, then you have to treat it with methods to cool the body down.
And so you must use a hot cautery to treat this condition, which you should be aware can cause more harm.
This means that doctors call a condition where there are swollen, painful joints, gout.
And upon them apply your cautery to the affected area, and consider what has been done to the foot.
And if it is necessary to hold the hands back from the affected area, you should apply a cautery.
Then the doctor places his hand on the patient's leg to feel for the presence of gout.
When a person's body has been treated for arthritis, it is common to use a cushion to support the legs or feet. And so if you have an incision made on the foot, another cushion placed under the patient's legs would be used to cover the wound, and a third for the other areas.
And if it's necessary to break down the illness into pieces, you can also use the word "rupture" as a synonym for "break" or "fracture".
If there's an imbalance of humors in the body, the pain will be severe.
And if any part of the body needs cauterization, you should use strong acids and the other remedies for it.
When there's a large amount of blood on their feet, they are already suffering from gout.
And if the veins are swollen, you should apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
This answer assumes that "Capitol .xlvi." refers to a chapter heading in a medical treatise.
Of the instruments necessary for surgery and making punctures.
Of these three types, one is large and another small.
Then you have already placed a hot cautery on their legs, another on their foot.
This is the text that describes how to treat pain in the joints caused by cold humors.
The doctors say that when pain comes from an ailment, it is customary to call it gout.
The body has 4 humors: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.
And if he is a man of great, middle-class, or little means, they are of three kinds.
Then apply cautery to the affected area if it is necessary to reduce swelling in the patient's feet.
La forma de experient, the other means of experiencing.
Gaiters are worn on the legs or feet to prevent pain from spreading.
The patient must be treated for their ailment by the other causes.
Then apply heat to the area with the hot needle-like instruments, ensuring they are properly heated before use, so that they can be effectively applied to the patient's body.
And if they are black, they are called black bile by the physicians, which is a sign of a bad humor, already present in the body, causing pain in the joints.
And if it is necessary to treat fistulas, it should be done by skilled physicians; for the treatment of the leg, use a hot iron.
Shape of the patient's lead-filled instrument
Lead cauterization.
When treating gout, apply cauterization only when necessary.
The text describes different types of nails and the proper treatment for gout.
And of their bodies three species are known.
And they are called by different names based on their location.
Et autre ubert on their legs, three physicians.
All these things are necessary for them in their place.
The text refers to the form or treatment of something related to a medical condition.
"And if you need to treat them." A cushion for their legs, if they have pain. And they are called double curves by a doctor.
And so the patient's body should be treated in three places by a form of medicine.
Forma of the body having three parts.
These are the ways to treat the joints, it's customary to use a cautery for nodes, but to treat them with other techniques too.
Form of the gout: when the patient's body is afflicted by an excess of phlegm, it is known as gout.
E si es la forma de la pierre's disease, the physician uses a specific type of cautery.
The patient's leg needs to be held in place while you work on them.
And for those who are already suffering from acute gout, cauterize the affected area.
And thus you will be able to tell if the pain is in the legs or feet.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And if you want to apply cautery, do so to the affected area when needed.
If a wound needs to be cauterized, then the foot is cauterized with heat, but only if the wound is an abscess, or on the surface, you should apply a hot poultice and not cauterize it. And then the methods of those:
There are three types of bloodletting: large, medium, and small.
And if it is customary to use round shapes for purging.
These are a few ways to translate "cove que sian aquestas specias" but I don't have enough context to know which one is correct.
"And therefore, when you are treating the patient, do not use those methods on the tender parts."
And if it is necessary to reduce swelling; others use a cushion, as in cautery.
And sometimes they are made round in this way;
The chapter title suggests that the following are instructions for treating an ailment related to the body's humors, likely gout, as in the case of the second sentence.
Then apply to the nipples of the breast of men
Some people say that the pain of some men is caused by their sleeping poorly, while others are inflamed by the heat.
.B. que de novo ha fet lo meu tractament de l'a.B.G.
When your body's humors are in balance with the help of gout remedies applied to the legs and feet, then the pain will lessen.
E so if it is true that doctors have customarily called it gout, it's important to remember that they are not always right.
Chapter 48.
A sharp instrument should be used on the patient's body to make an opening if it is necessary.
And if you have not already done so, apply cautery to them to burn away their pain.
And if you are going to treat a patient's leg for a case of gout: it's important to use a cushion when treating them.
When a cushion is placed on the knee, it should be healed.
When the patient's health improves, the doctor may use other methods.
Then, if the plague is widespread, it's customary to apply a cautery to the affected area.
Another translation for the sentence "And if you have to make an incision on the intestine" should be "And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs"
This likely refers to the process of lancing or treating boils (arceria/vena) and describes something related to how to apply the cushion after lancing a boil.
When the artery is broken, the pain will be felt in the veins; but if it is a vein that's ruptured, you'll know it by the throbbing pain.
When someone's veins are filled with blood, they are said to have a specific type of illness that causes pain in their feet.
And if the body's humors are out of balance, it is customary to use cauterization for treatment.
Then you should cut into the area of the abdomen affected by inflammation.
And then place a pad on their legs to prevent further pain.
When you need to cauterize the area, place your hand on their legs and do so.
And if it is necessary to treat the condition of the leg in the patient.
E tu has already given me the answer: The English translation is "And if you have a boil on your foot, apply a cushion to prevent it from reaching your legs," which is a bit different from the original text.
And if you are in need to drain the pus from the affected area, apply a poultice to the wound.
And so you cauterize the abscess with a heated cautery, while another person holds the patient's thighs and another person holds the affected part.
Then place it on their legs (the cushion), and apply your hand to the affected area.
This being the case, there are other things that can be done to address the issue of the patient's swollen legs.
And similarly, if an abscess forms in the legs, it is called a boil on the leg, or if it occurs in the body, it is called a post.
And if the pain is in the feet, then it is called another thing.
And if there is a severe pain in your foot, or elsewhere in the body, it is often called gout.
And if you need to treat an abscess, apply heated cautery to the area.
Therefore, if it's in the leg or foot joints, you should use cauterization.
And you must cauterize the area on the head or forehead. Mays means "it is" and is used as an affirmative expression in this context.
And if the patient has a hernia, apply a cushion to their legs.
Chapter 51.
The first pain occurs in the legs.
Then they should be applied to the patient's body and legs.
And he put two parts together in the belly, and they were two parts different to the other.
And if they were to be treated, their own words would describe it as such.
And if there is pain in the legs or feet, let the metrical doctors apply their treatments.
And if the operation is done on the leg which has been affected by the other illness (presumably the one mentioned earlier), then you have to cauterize it with a pointed tool.
And if it is already festering with pain, apply that to the patient's legs;
Esercitio
Mays si theil es le patient that has a cushion under them, and one in the open leg.
It is possible that they are using a cushion to protect the patient's body.
Then treat that person with healing methods.
Then hold still, and don't let your hand move, as the patient has already had their bowels cut open.
And you have already opened the space of the patient's foot.
Chapter 52.
On treatment for the pain caused by an inflamed appendix.
It is said that the body experiences many different ailments; some are due to wind in the intestines.
May it be known that the condition is called leucorrhea. And if you have already diagnosed a patient as needing treatment for something that causes pain in their legs, then place a cushion on the surface where the pain is felt, and apply the other member of the body to the area, so that the intestines do not fall out.
And if it be a pain from humidity, that is, if the foot be opened by your hand, then you must cauterize it.
And now if there are too many phlegmatic humors, a physician will treat the body based on the symptoms.
When you are hungry, your body can be fed by a cushion of food.
And if it is caused by windiness, you should place a cushion on their legs, and use another method for the ailment.
This translates to something like:  "And if it is necessary to treat the area around the knee."
And if it is necessary to put a bandage on the patient’s legs, I will put a bandage on their legs and they can be healed by putting a cushion under them and another on their chest, but this is for one type of ailment.
And so you should cauterize the intestine for the benefit of the pain in the foot.
You have found the cure for the ailment; apply this treatment to the afflicted part of the body.
When your body is in a state of health, you can use this to help prevent the pain from being too painful.
And if you wish, apply a cauterizer to that which is in the body, for example, the one who has a wound or an ailment, and leave them to stand still so the pain is more intense; and hold the wound in place.
The patient's body should be cleansed of both fire and moisture.
The doctor is treating the patient's foot.
Translation: This refers to the treatment of wounds.
And I have said, that in the cure of the body, you must apply a cushion to their legs.
E dixe que some ancients also called it that.
When cold and heavy, it may be called incurable.
This describes the process of treating someone suffering from black death in a medieval medical context.
Then place a cushion under the patient's leg, and prepare the affected area for the procedure. The patient's feet may have been cold, so the doctor put their hand on the patient's leg to keep them warm.
If there is pain in the feet, then treat it with other remedies for the legs or with a cauterizer, and place a cushion on the leg to stop the bleeding.
The livor of la persona which is on the leg, e'n la cap.
On the treatment of swollen limbs.
They have already diagnosed the condition as that of "hydropsy," and recommended cushion treatment.
Then place another cushion under their legs and make sure the patient is comfortable.
The first person to apply medicine to treat the patient's illness in the body should be a doctor.
When the patient has too much bile, the doctors are called upon to operate on them, placing their hands on the abdomen during the operation.
This text is likely referring to a medical procedure, but I need more context to provide an accurate translation.
And then consider if there are three cushions for each of those who have been cut open.
Then apply three fingers to the patient's side, where the liver is located.
If your pain is caused by cold humors that are in the legs, they will be healed through the use of cautery.
And so that you may know, the patient's leg should be kept in place.
And then cauterize the affected area with a hot iron, and apply the points to the patient's legs.
And if the patient's legs are open to the point of being splayed, then perforate them at the location of the injury. Place a cushion under the patient. This sounds like a description of a treatment for a hernia, which may involve using a silver needle to reduce it.
The first sentence means: **And if you want to treat them (for their ailment) by the method of cauterization, which is also called "the gout"**.
And if it is necessary to make adjustments to the patient's legs, that is what the term "bontà" means in this context, it refers to the patient's condition, and another term "disposicio" would be used for the "disposition" of the body.
And apply the instrument to the foot so that it can be cauterized in accordance with its nature.
And let the patient be treated with a small amount of cautery on the other days to stop the pain from spreading through the body.
And if it is necessary to place the patient on a bed in a sunny location.
And place your hand on their stomach to control the pain.
Capitol .50
And thus you will cauterize the skin between the legs.
Some people use this word "gout" to describe a condition where cold humors cause painful swelling in the joints.
And thus, the patient is treated with cautery for their thighs.
And apply a poultice to the affected area three times daily, and leave it on for three days.
And when they are urinating, you should place a cushion under the bladder and hold their hands to prevent them from suffering.
Then it may be necessary to cauterize the area if there is swelling in the intestines or another location.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es quelio es
This pain arises from the heat in the legs of the patient, which can be relieved by applying a cushion to the area.
This is a description of how to perform surgery on the patient's left leg, using cautery, while leaving the intestines undisturbed.
And if you have a wound or infection that causes bleeding, another application is needed.
**Capitol .lvi. **
The foreskin is also called "the skin" in this context.
Here comes the first part of the ancient text translated, so that you can see what I think it means:
And one of those is malignant and the other is benign.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on the foot, you should use a cushion to hold the patient's hand.
And if the humor is bad, you must apply heat to their feet, and apply a bandage to them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the head of the penis, it is a practice that is used on the patient's body when it is swollen and painful.
Then you will apply the cushion to the patient's feet, and place their legs in their proper position, so that the pain doesn't spread to other parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to apply a remedy to the patient, there must be another cushion in place for their other legs and feet.
Therefore, if you have blood flow issues, apply a moonstone cautery in this manner.
When the body's humors are corrupted, gout is caused by an excess of blood in the foot.
And you should insert the other end of the cane under the skin where the patient's urine would flow out through that opening.
Then apply a poultice to the legs if they are affected by the disease but do not require cautery treatment for their pain.
Then you must cauterize the affected area of the patient's body to prevent the spread of the disease.
Then use a tool to separate the skin between the foreskin and the penis, carefully removing any excess so that the head of the penis does not become too tight.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area and let it be cauterized.
Another cushion on their chest, et so that they should be in the cavity of the patient's body.
Then apply a bandage to the part of the body where the incision was made.
When a patient's body has an illness, they are treated with a cautery.
And if it is necessary to make an incision in the skin of the legs, this is done with a surgical tool called a "novacula".
When you place a cushion under the legs, you should use a sharp instrument to cut it open for better relief from pain. And the pain in the groin caused by gout is severe.
And if in the operation, you have to put a cushion under the patient's foot, ensure the incision is properly closed. The child's body is naturally prone to developing short intestines.
And if you are to use the cautery on the patient, ensure they have a cushion placed under them.
The next day, apply the cautery to the child again.
And if you wish to apply heat to the body, it is customary to use a hot cushion. And you should hold the legs still (with) a cushion; the same goes for your tools, which are hidden under the patient's hands, so that the child wouldn't see them; they don't understand what these things are.
And then place your hand on the patient's foot and press against the wound to draw out the pain.
This is a description of how to use forceps in a medical procedure.
This one is tricky, but I think it means: "And if some other veins are in the body of the patient, and others are extramitats (extremities), et autre cushion under their legs, et another on their arms."
When translated into English, this might mean:
Then apply cautery to that area.
And if you can't remove the stone by ordinary means, use a hot iron to pull it out.
After three days, you will apply the cauterized area to the affected limb, which you must keep covered for three days after burning.
And if you have already opened the hip joint, remember to hold the patient's legs together while they are on their backs.
Therefore apply your hand to it so that the plague may be cured.
And if you have an injury to the legs that is outside the scope of what is usually called gout, the physician should be consulted.
And if you are cured, you may be able to resume normal activities.
Translation 2: And if it is necessary to remove something from their feet, let them be removed by force.
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retaining the intestines in their proper place is important for preventing pain.
And if the cause of the illness is not caused by a deficiency of the body's humors, it is customary to call this condition rheumatism.
And if you apply heat to the thighs of a patient who has no need for such a thing, a small incision in the thigh may cause a reaction.
And do apply another servant on their legs and another on the patient's feet to prevent them from suffering.
Then apply a cautery to the body's extremities, especially the feet, to ensure it remains on the outside of the body as they are cauterized.
And if necessary, apply a cushion to the patient's urine flow.
Then apply a cautery to their legs, and provide relief for them.
Chapter 59.
If you wish to apply an enema, use this method.
And if you have pain in the bladder, then apply a poultice to the area.
When applied to the foot, it should be considered a sign of its being sick. And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs of the patient and one on the feet.
At the beginning, place a cushion under them, for the pain in their legs.
When using a hot iron to cauterize an ailing bladder, use a cushion on their legs, as in the case of a burning sensation.
Then place the patient's legs in a way that prevents the bladder from being pierced by the humors; then apply the extramet (medicinal poultice) to their legs, e.g., on the ankles or knees.
This sentence likely refers to the incision technique used for surgery on the bladder.
And if it is made of silver or of bronze, its use is to hold the small veins.
And place a cushion under their legs, and another on their chest, so that they are supported by the cushion.
And then he placed another cushion on their legs.
And then apply a hot poultice to their bladder or kidneys, to draw out any inflammation.
And if you want to stop the flow of urine from the bladder, use a cautery on their legs, for it is said that this condition can be treated with a poultice, and that a poultice relieves the pain.
Then apply a cauterizing agent to each wound.
The chapter number indicates this should be translated as "Chapter 60".
On the treatment of gout.
Nos ja havem spoken about the types of stone in the different types of joints and how to tell them apart.
And if they are in pain, we will say that it should be treated by applying a cautery to their legs, and then the patient’s legs were opened and his hands were held.
When there is pain that arises in the body, apply your hand to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to explain the meaning of these translations: You've got your hand on the patient's foot.
Apeu, therefore, a full-blown pain in the area of the affected part of the body.
And then they are healed by applying herbs to their wounds. It is customary for young people to be treated with a poultice on their legs.
And if you are treating a patient whose pain is caused by an ailment in the foot, it is customary to use a cautery on their legs.
This is a tricky one! It looks like the text is mixing words from different languages. My best guess at translating that one line:
And then place your hand on the affected area to help them.
And if you are ready, the patient should be cauterized in the area of the body where the pain is located.
E aprop a red hot iron over the patient's legs.
And if you need to place a hot poultice on the legs, put it on the thighs.
And if you are applying a poultice to the affected area, it's important to note that they are not always in their proper place. And if a stone is present, it should be removed. And slowly turn back that which has caused the pain in their legs.
Then apply heat to the affected area as you close it.
And command him to hold his hand over his leg, and to place it on the other side.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to a patient's leg, hold them still with a cushion. And if you are suffering from an ailment that causes pain in the feet, it is known as a case of the narrowest section being treated by a surgeon.
And that's why doctors say it is hard to cure.
And from their legs a lion is made, and it is round, and is done by the leg which has been opened up.
Then, if it is a pain in the limbs, treat it as a hernia, meaning a cushion should be placed on the affected area.
And if the patient's legs are not strong enough for a straight-up surgery, keep them from being taken outside to prevent it from becoming an illness.
If you cannot stop the pain in their feet with medicines, then try a cauterization.
This is a description of how to use a cautery on the patient's body for treatment.
When the pain in the legs is great, apply a cushion to the knee joints, or if it's necessary to make them feel less pain, it is customary to use the other as a poultice for the knee.
And now you must treat the fracture of the foot.
Therefore, after completing the operation, apply aloe and dragon's blood to the wound. And apply a bandage to the wound and let it be treated with water and oil.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area, for three days after which the patient will be relieved.
And so when the patient's illness was cured, his/her body was free from the evil humors.
And when there's a wound on the bladder or urethra, it is customary to call it the bladder's inflammation.
And apply heat to the intestines, but only when necessary.
You have already established the proper treatment for gout, which you can use to treat your patient's condition.
And if the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the body, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
When the patient's condition requires it, you can treat it as gout.
Then put some fire under the legs to burn out the badness that has spread there from elsewhere.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, do so with a cushion to protect from the blade. E si vos legs are affected by these humors, it is good to use the cauterization method on the legs if you make a diagnosis of gout.
When the other sources are used up, apply your hand to the area, and the patient will be healed.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it is called gout by those who use the ancient methods: And here comes the first one: And the patient is ready for the extraction. Then treat the patient's legs with proper care by using a cushion to keep them comfortable and warm.
When the bowels are affected by the pain, they will be affected by the plague.
And if there are other causes for the pain in his legs, he's likely to use a different method than what we just discussed.
And then apply a cauterizing tool (like a hot iron) directly to the area affected by gout.
Another common treatment for stones in the body would be to have them removed from the patient.
This translates to: **"And so it is customary for metges to treat gout by applying it to the legs."**
Gout is cured by applying a hot cautery to the affected area, if necessary.
The woman's legs are very swollen.
And if a woman has a swollen joint, it is due to an excess of humors, which are known to be treated by physicians using various methods.
The third part of the body is where the pain is concentrated if you don't know the true art of medicine.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on women, it is done far from the area where the operation will be performed.
And when the need arises, you know what to do.
When you are deprived of the warmth in its cavity, the body will be affected by all sorts of ailments.
And if the woman is found to be chaste, it's necessary to consider if she is suffering from a disease.
Therefore, if you are experiencing joint pain in your legs, it is likely gout.
But if they have a woman who has never had intercourse, use the cushion to protect her from harm.
Then, using a cauterizacioon on the bladder to control the flow.
Then, then you have to cauterize the joint pain in the legs.
And if it is necessary to make a section on their legs, then do so gently; and place another person's leg in the space between them.
And know that some spices are hot, some are sweet and round, and if it were to be said, some are spicy and other things are known.
And thus you know what you must do.
And if a flow of blood is needed, adjust the vein or artery to be cauterized and use a hot point to stop the bleeding.
And if you are a surgeon, treat gout by using instruments to remove the afflicted parts, and use your hands for other purposes.
And if the blood in the veins is flowing, the blood flows to the area where the wound is located, so that the patient's health is not affected by the cautery. Then return the patient's body to its usual state.
And if the patient's body needs to be opened for surgery, use the other techniques.
A cushion is placed on the legs for the patient.
Then, you must cauterize the hernia.
Gout is an illness caused by the infiltration of humors into the intestine.
And there you have it, a hot iron cautery to treat the ailment caused by the excessive humors in the body.
And put a cushion on the chest and if the blood flows to the feet it will be a strong generation that will cause the pain.
And this sickness affects the legs, causing pain in the patient's thighs.
Then apply a poultice to the wound, which is located in the affected area, for healing.
And if the moisture is in the body, it is redon called a boil or swelling, which is how they would have been known in the past.
And if they are suffering from humidity, then treat them with a cold cautery.
And if you want to know the nature of the inflammation, examine its color as indicated by the location of the pain.
And if they have an ailment in the legs or feet, apply a cautery to the patient's body, and place another on the area to help them.
And if the patient's pain is eased, the cause of which is a cushion on their legs, then you may call it gout in their toes.
And other put another cushion on their legs and the other one under their right side, above the left thigh, below the right, and the second one beneath the left foot and on their chest, to prevent them from being too cold.
And apply a poultice to the affected area to cure the ailment.
Make a section on the legs of the patient, and apply the knife to the groin area.
When you cauterize the flesh, apply it carefully to the area where the pain is located.
And then the opening is made in their flesh by a wide-ranging cauterization.
E aprop has doctour to separate the patient's body in two parts. And if it is possible to burn the bad humors from the body, then do so primarily on the lower legs, and place the cushion below the feet and ankles.
Mays is treated as the patient's ailment, but when it is in the foot, they may be suffering from gout.
Then place your hand on the affected area to soothe the pain and prevent further complications.
When water is divided into two parts, it is the same as if it were already divided in two, so you should know that those are the hernias; then you will make a cushion for them.
Then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar to the area.
Then apply a cushion to the cushion already placed under the patient's thighs; place your hand on their legs, another on the knee, and another on the other leg.
This is a medical text about treating pain in the feet. And if it is necessary to make cuts on the leg, the surgeon will make incisions in the area where the bone is affected by the cold humors.
When the cavity is closed off, this can be treated by making points on the body.
Then gently place the hot cautery on their legs to remove the pain from them, and apply the cauterization to the affected joint.
And if you know that the patient has a problem with their bowels, it means they are suffering from gout.
And then, if the patient's condition requires it, surgery may be necessary on their legs.
This translates to:
Then, if there are other signs of illness, such as swelling in the legs, it should be called "the heat" or "the boil."
And if there are other causes, you can treat them broadly, as they are likely to be related to the patient's legs or feet.
And if there's pain in the joints, stop the burning at the joint. And if it is necessary, place a cushion on the legs of the patient to prevent the plague from spreading.
Or, in that hour, place a cauterizer or another instrument on the cushion beneath them.
When the patient's body has been afflicted by gout, other servants should treat them accordingly.
Capitol 63.
To cut open the chest for a hernia and to apply cautery to the legs, which you would use to treat them.
When there is pain in the joints, some think it is a sign of a good surgeon.
The patient's pain in his feet, another cushion under his foot.
Then return the hand to its place on the body and apply it to the affected area.
And if there is a need for cautery on their legs or feet, it must be done carefully due to the severity of the illness.
And if you want to treat a festering wound, apply a poultice.
And sometimes inflammation occurs in the veins or in the arteries.
This is a tricky one without knowing the exact context, but here's a possible translation:
When blood vessels swell up due to an inflammation in the leg, then the veins are opened, and they will apply a cushion under your arm, for example, as they treat them.
E then it is possible that gout can affect other muscles in the body; you should apply a poultice to the affected area, you should use a cautery on their feet if they have pain there, and the skin of the patient's foot.
Therefore, if the humors are already solidified in the patient's feet, you should apply another cushion there.
And if there is an adhesion in the intestine or elsewhere, you must apply cautery to that area.
When there are pains in the flesh, it's customary to treat them as I have already explained.
Then, when you have finished treating the patient's legs, place a cushion on their feet to protect them from harm.
Capitol .lxiv.
This is the cure for a type of pain in the legs.
The patient's body must be opened up with a hot iron to allow for easier treatment.
This is for fear that the disease may be caused by a fear of the person being treated.
But the sickness that affects the limbs, which we call gout, and has been treated with a cauterization method, requires a different approach.
And if you are to apply it, let the patient be seated on a high stool.
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent further bloodletting.
Then return the patient's foot to its natural position.
This sentence describes applying pressure to the patient's legs during an operation. And if the patient’s legs are swollen and painful, you must apply cautery to the affected areas.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs, and treat the other plagues as needed.
And if it is necessary to treat the testicles, they will be treated as follows: one cushion should be placed on the leg or another part of the body, and the other should be used for the patient's comfort.
e't anima per la dolor del pes, e't si necessita a la carne de lu, et another on their knees for the patient to move their legs freely, so that the pain of the other parts of the body is not aggravated.
Then apply a cushion on their legs for support.
This refers to a hernia that occurs on the body, specifically near the foot, and mentions its treatment in the provided context.
This person might be experiencing pain from an imbalance in their humors, which we've been told to call "clogged humor" when dealing with a condition affecting their feet.
In the case of gout, doctors call the condition a "gout" if a person has the symptoms of a cushion being placed under the foot.
And the sign of them is when sudden pain occurs in the joints; another at the beginning of the pain that comes on their legs.
When the patient experiences pain in their joints or limbs, it is called a "gout" by the physicians, but they are wrong.
E' alcun is that hand placed on their legs, the intestine is called an instrument for applying cauterization.
Then return the pain to its proper place in the body by using a cushion under their legs and another under their chest.
And if you are treating a patient for whom their leg must be held in place.
Then you must cauterize the skin to prevent inflammation from spreading.
E si' la dolor en el pietz
Then there are cushions placed under their testicles so that the intestine doesn't come out.
When the testicles are in pain, apply cauterization to them if you have already used the cushion on their legs.
And if it is necessary to treat the intestine with the cautery, then one must apply it to the area where the pain is felt.
E cerqua am to the patient: "And then your legs are put in place under the cushion." If you find there is a problem with the patient's abdomen, they should be treated with a cushion on their stomach.
Prevent the pain by applying a cushion to the foot.
And let oil be applied to the patient's legs, and let the leg itself be cauterized, if necessary.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
And thus it cures all other plagues among the plagues that are.
And if they are suffering from cold humors that cause numbness in the foot, then apply a cautery to their feet.
Then describe the condition of the patient's legs and feet as you see fit.
And they have used a cushion on the foot.
Then you will apply heat to the affected area as needed to treat the patient.
And cure the plague according to what we have said so that they may be healed.
This sentence is likely about the treatment of gout, and perhaps the translation of a medical text would be too literal.
You have already placed the cushion on their legs, so now we need to know what you did with the other parts of the body.
When there are painful swellings in the body, some in the legs, another in the abdomen, and another on their feet, it is customary to call it a cushion-like condition of the feet.
And if they have been burned by the physician, it is advisable to apply a poultice to soothe them.
When the foot pain is prolonged, the which can be treated by the application of a poultice, then it will be necessary to apply a cauterizer.
This treatment is called for when the patient has pain caused by inflammation in the joints.
And sometimes it is cured by placing a cushion between them.
And if it's necessary to treat their legs, they should be put on a cushion below so the patient doesn't get a cold.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, and another on their chest.
And if the patient has an injury or ailment, adjust the treatment accordingly.
Then apply a hot iron to their leg, and use a bandage to keep the area warm.
For the treatment of that ailment, you should use another cushion for the plague.
And the patient's health will be better.
Capitol sixty-eight.
And if you have to apply a poultice or other remedies to the patient's legs, it is customary to use a cushion.
And if it is necessary to treat them with other applications of a cautery, then do so.
When there are two or more pieces of the body to be healed, it is called a cushion.
And apply a hot cautery to ensure the patient doesn't move their hands.
And then treat the other ailments with needles.
Another part of the text suggests that it's about a medical procedure.
On castration.
And if the body is to be treated by a physician, they should also use these methods.
Therefore, castration is performed by making an incision or by crushing.
That's the way to operate on animals; they are softened by cauterization in order to make them less resistant. Then apply the treatment to those limbs that are affected by gout, and ensure the patient's hands don't come into contact with the affected area.
When performing surgery to repair a rupture, make sure to apply your hand to the other side.
And if there is no other remedy available to the patient, it is a common practice to apply a poultice to the area.
And if you have already opened the wound in their leg, et a cushion will be placed under them. And do not let the illness spread to the legs through the blood vessels.
This is the best way to treat a gouty animal.
Then cure the plague so that it does not spread further.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
When a man needs to be treated with cautery, the treatment should be done in such a way that it does not harm the surrounding areas.
And then apply the cautery to their legs, but only when it is necessary to cauterize them.
Mays en las femnas es una specia where the two forms are used.
There are three types of healing: by two people for men and women for themselves. Cove es that they will cure their own flesh from the ills that plague the patient’s body.
And for those who suffer from the pain of the second type of illness, there are no cures or operations.
Chapter .xxi.
The blood of the body is treated as if it were a kind of humors in the body to be balanced by the use of a cautery.
And some are affected by others' affections, so they are treated with another person's cautery.
When you are full of lentils, it is customary to apply a poultice of lentils to the affected area.
Then apply a burning cautery to the area to relieve pain in the foot, but be careful not to cause further damage.
And apply your hand to the treatment of the ailments.
And if you are a man who has a cushion, he will be called a “cushion-bearer”
This appears to be a portion of a medical treatise describing the use of **"e"** as a word in a language similar to Latin, possibly an archaic form or dialect.
Another treatment for gout.
Then, if it's necessary to treat a woman, make sure the infection doesn't spread from the wound on her foot. And so the pain is either natural or accidental.
And for those who have a disease, the patient's body is affected by gout, which causes their feet to be in pain.
You have already placed a cushion under their chest or legs?
And if the pain in the legs persists, then place your hand on their feet and do the same to the other leg.
When the pain is in the joints, they should be treated with cauterization.
And do not let anyone say that you are a good physician if you don't know what you are doing.
And another place a cushion on their chest.
And if it is necessary to treat the affected area with oil, then place a cloth on it.
And if the cushion is already in place, you should use another method.
May's that is why it is called gout.
And apply the bandage to stop the pain from spreading.
And place a small lead weight on their hand if necessary to prevent the plague from spreading quickly.
And so for some days, apply a hot compress to the body.
And you should apply another treatment to their legs, if they are healed.
And if it is necessary to make incisions, then the following method should be used: When it comes to abscesses, they should be avoided in the area of the body where they are found.
The chapter title refers to an area or chapter number 73, likely suggesting a focus on humors and their relation to health.
Treat the prolapsed rectum with a hot cautery.
The translation should be written in Latin:
And I have explained the types of illnesses that are caused by the body.
And then comes the problem of gout, which is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the parts of the body affected by it.
Those are the ones who truly feel the pain of gout.
And so that the patient's legs do not suffer from the cold, you will have to put your hand on their thighs, and another on the area where they are standing.
And then pulverize the blood with a small incision.
Then apply a cushion to their feet for an hour, and allow them to bleed the patient for one hour.
And if the blood flows, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's sides and legs.
Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet and then if necessary, apply a poultice to the area.
And if it is caused by a cold humor, it is called by doctors as a bad sign.
The intestine or hernia is what causes the pain in the foot.
The other parts of the body are for another time.
Some pustules are found on the feet, some on their legs, and some on their hands. And if there are ulcers or inflammations on their legs, they should be treated with poultices, while the physician attends to the patient's affliction.
And if it is a cushion placed under the thighs, a poultice will be applied to the affected area as well as another on the area where the cushion is placed.
When a person has an inflammation in the foot, it's important to treat them quickly with the appropriate methods.
And then you must place two cushions under her legs.
When necessary, midwives use instruments to open the cervix during childbirth.
Then apply a hot iron to the legs, so that it will be good for the patient's body, but do not use it on the feet. And you should place a cushion on their legs, the other cushions being placed on the body in various ways.
And if you have a fever, apply a poultice to the affected area, and use another for pain relief.
And if there are any swelling in the leg or foot, then you must place a cushion on their legs to prevent it from spreading.
And if there is a cushion placed under the patient's legs, it should be pressed into the wound to prevent the intestines from protruding.
When the patient's legs are inflamed, they should be placed on a cushion.
Then apply the healing ointment to the affected area for two days.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the pain in the gut, use a pointed tool to apply heat to the affected area.
Then, if you wish to apply the cauterization to the plague-ridden area, you must be careful in dealing with the disease.
The pain in the intestines or other parts of the body can be treated by applying a poultice to those areas.
And if a woman's womb is to be treated with a cautery, it should be done in a way that avoids opening the joint, lest the pain of the ailment spread.
The midwife must ensure that the woman's womb is protected and covered during childbirth, and apply heat to the affected area if she needs to be warmed up.
Thus if the patient has pain in their legs or other parts of the body, it means that they have something called a "quart" which is an ailment.
Then apply cautery to that area on the patient's body where the pain is felt in the foot, which is typically in the joints but can also be in other parts of the body.
And if she wants to avoid complications, the midwife should be careful when dealing with the pain in the legs or feet.
And if you are treating a patient, treat the legs, and the feet, to keep them calm.
When the body is weak, the first thing to do is to treat it with herbs that cause him to lose weight.
And then apply the cauteri to the patient's feet. And apply it to the stomach of the woman, and use it for another purpose.
Mays it be that the patient has suffered enough by now.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient for a condition in the legs that causes them to sneeze (to be treated by a doctor).
And if the pain is in the legs, place your hand on them gently to help. And if you are not obese, it is customary to treat the surface of the body in the same way as you would for gout.
Then, if the body is not already burned by the hot cautery, do it, and then apply the cautery to the legs and feet to draw out the humors.
When the foot is affected, it is necessary to use a cushion under their feet and treat the condition gradually.
Then you should apply a cautery to the legs.
Then you must place a cushion over their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E if it is prohibited to have already been treated by a physician, then treat it with a poultice of honey and water. Then apply your hand to the wound.
And if the pain in the joints of the body is soothed, then they are ready for that. And for one hour, the patient's body will be exposed to smoke, and the doctor will use a heated tool to cauterize the area.
Then apply a cautery to the feet, and then apply pressure to the other areas where the disease has affected them. And if you are to apply heat, one should place a cushion on the leg, and another on the chest.
Then if the illness prevents walking, let them lie down and place cushions to support the legs and another cushion on their feet so as to prevent further pain.
And if they have developed a fever, it is customary to use a cauterizing tool on them.
The patient's legs are now being held in place, but the intestine is open. The midwife should apply a cushion to the womb of the patient.
If you have a cushion on your hand for the pain in their legs, apply it to the body of the patient, if they are swollen or inflamed.
Then command the patient to move their feet, and if it's necessary, use another cushion on their chest for them to cough into. A patient's death was near at hand, but a cushion was placed under them.
When treating gout in this way, consider using a cautery with a different setting.
And if you have a wound on their belly, you should use a cushion to cover it up.
And if you are already treating the pain in their legs, then the physician should be careful.
When gout affects multiple joints, doctors call it gout. But when the body is affected by three or four natural causes, it's called a disease.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs or their feet, we will use a lighter method, like a cautery with a point, rather than one that forces them out.
And if it is difficult for a person to get sick.
And if it is necessary to treat a patient's legs for humors, they must be treated with a cauterization tool.
and the patient's limbs are affected by such things, causing them to be unable to walk.
The cushion is placed under their feet, e.g., on the foot, so that the patient's body is in balance.
And if a woman's legs are opened, she will be cauterized by a physician, but if her arms are opened, it is called a doctor.
Capitol lxxvi.
When the patient dies.
And if you have to perform surgery on their feet, then consider whether the intestine is affected by the same disease as the woman's feet.
When the time comes to open the wound on the foot, and to place a cushion under her legs, let the woman be treated by a doctor, have the wound cauterized with fire.
And if there are two cushions already on their legs, the patient will be held in place.
And then you put some oil on the mouth and they are wet with your saliva, which can be used to treat gout.
And if you have pain in the legs, then the doctor should be called.
Then place your cushion on their legs or chest, if the patient is an infant.
And if it is necessary for the feet, one on the left foot, another cushion on the right foot, and the other on the body, to be put in a place to hold them.
And if you are skilled in placing your hand, then apply it to the patient's right foot, for on the legs of men, it is customary.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to the third layer of skin.
And then (the pain) in the legs will be relieved by the use of a hot compress to reduce inflammation.
And if the pain is caused by their intestines or other parts being affected by gout, you should treat them with a hot iron; place a cushion under the area to be cauterized.
Therefore, if the patient's leg has been exposed to a burn, one should immediately apply a cushion to the area to prevent further damage.
If the pain is in the foot, it is customary to call it “humors” (gout).
And so, if the other two are placed on their legs, it is called by the name of the cushion.
Mays call what is in the foot “a” by "coartao en le" -  And now we’re going to apply a hot poultice or something similar to the other areas where they are needed.
And if they have a natural predisposition to such ailments, let the doctor use a similar method for treating the intestine as he would for the legs.
And then place a cushion under their feet, and use bandages to reduce swelling.
Here comes the English translation:
If swelling in the joints occurs, cover it with your hand when it does to prevent further damage.
If you have pain in your legs, use a cushion to ease the pain.
Here comes the first part of a possible translation: When there are pain in the lower legs, it is commonly called gout.
Gout is caused by cold humors entering the joints.
And if the mouth of the patient is constricted by a gouty buildup, then you must use a cushion to support them, and apply it to other parts of the body as well. Then apply a poultice to the affected area; and for the other things that are bothering them, you should use other remedies.
Then they should be treated with cushions on their sides.
When it is impossible to burn the body's excess humors, one should use a poultice on their feet.
Then let them know that their pain is not in the knees.
And then when the patient has been cured of the disease in their legs, they should be treated as one would normally treat such things.
And if they are using another method, they should use the cushion on their legs and another for other ailments.
And if you see a woman with a burning pain in her stomach, then apply a hot cautery. You have already opened the space between their legs, and a cushion has been placed on their chest; they are ready to be treated.
And if the patient has been treated for a long time, it will be healed by cauterization.
Then place a cushion on the affected area for relief from the pain.
Then you think that the dead man has already been cleansed of his humors.
Therefore, treat them to correct their illness.
And if you have already opened the space between the legs and the feet, it is known as gout in all parts of the body.
De la cushion should be placed on the patient's feet.
Then apply heat to the area around the ankles to prevent the intestine from being inflamed
This is how you treat a person for a condition related to the body's humors, so you should use this method on someone who has a problem with their bowels. And so that the physician can apply cautery, if necessary, to the body, etc.
The patient's legs are being treated for a painful condition caused by two sources.
Then these two things are done to the legs so that they can be kept open.
Take its form, from a Latin leg which was placed on their feet, or legs to be treated.
And if you wish to apply a cautery to the legs, use the cushion to protect the patient's body. But perhaps the fire will spread to the feet, and so they say to the physician.
This is a description of how to treat the body with a cautery tool. Then you will open the patient's leg with your tool as a way to treat what they are suffering from.
The ancients used this term for the condition of vertigo.
When the shape of the body is distorted by pressure, apply cauterization to the affected area.
The patient has a pain in their head.
And then apply forceps to their legs, as they are used to make the intestine or other parts of the body come out, and then cauterize the area where the forceps are applied. The ancient art of bloodletting.
It's a medical treatise on gout.
And if there are two spiny things in their legs, they will be treated with a hot cautery.
If a patient has a swollen foot due to gout, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Apply a cautery on their legs.
When the tools are used on the body, one must be careful and use them carefully.
And so you should always apply these instruments to a gouty patient, as they are often used for treating them.
Then there are the legs.
And if your patient has a cough, you should use a remedy to make them cough up the phlegm.
And if it is necessary to make a hole in the body, apply the above-mentioned remedies. These herbs are to be placed in water, and these herbs are to be used for cauterization.
E aprop pausa en la sua cavitat.
Then put your hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from making a gesture.
If the pain persists, you will need to apply a cauterization with a hot iron, but if you wish to stop it, you must use a cold one. Then you must cauterize it on both sides, so that the patient's body does not expel the cushion.
And if the mouth is constricted, the treatment is to apply heat or medication to the affected area.
If you are suffering from the pain of a woman's illness, then you must use a cushion for her to rest upon.
"Then apply the poultice to the patient's stomach and use a smoke cauterization method on their feet."
May it be translated as: "Then put some of the other remedies on the legs, and apply heat to prevent further discomfort."
When the woman suffers from painful menstruation, apply the cushion to the area where the cautery would be applied.
The patient's legs are already in their proper place.
Then place a hot cautery on the cushion and apply it to the wide area of the body that has an open wound.
And if the patient has an intestine or a hernia, they will be in pain.
Place the cushion on the child's legs, so that they are not touched.
When there is pain in the limbs of a child, be careful not to cause further injury. When there's a need to use a cautery tool on a patient's legs, they should be called upon to help by placing a cushion under their knees.
E aprop pause over their knees, so as to prevent further pain.
When the pain begins, a person should be treated with a hot cautery.
When your body's need for healing arises, such as when treating a bunion or plague sore, you must apply pressure to prevent them from being disturbed.
And so that they may be cured, another by applying heat to the area where the fistula is located.
The which are called fistulas or boils if they are on the outside of the body, but if they are inside the body, then it is called a malaute.
This is a reference to a specific type of medical condition that affects the body.
And if the patient has swelling from an excess of watery humor in their body, it's already known as gout.
And if there is pain in the joints, it is customary to call it gout.
When there are already blisters on their legs, they should be treated with a cushion placed on the affected area.
A person who is healthy should have a cushion placed on the chest and another on the area where the wound appears in the body, so that no one feels the pain of the condition.
When the pain is severe, place a cushion under your own feet.
If there is no pain in the legs or feet from the disease, treat it as you would for a healthy person.
And when there is an opening in the legs of the patient, the English call it sciatica.
Perhaps the intestine has been opened for a procedure on the joint or something similar?
And in all those fistulas on the legs, the other foot is cured by cushions.
And when there are wounds on the legs or feet, healing is expected as long as one can heal them properly.
And if you have already opened the space between the legs, place a cushion beneath them, and support the opening by holding your hand on their leg.
Then when the patient has a pain in their neck, apply another cushion around the neck to hold it in place.
If the intestine or the other organs are affected by the pain of gout, then you can be certain that the patient suffers from it.
Then they are healthy, and yet they have gout in their toes, so we must use other methods to treat them.
And if it is necessary to burn away the skin above the bone and the surrounding flesh, then use a fine cautery on the fistula, as it affects only the surface of the body, but for those who are sick in their feet, it is said that they should be used.
The patient has an ailment in their feet.
And if it affects their feet, then you should use a cautery to burn the area on the surface of the foot.
And so the affected area be opened and cleansed, and the wounds cauterized to prevent further damage.
This could mean "Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs in order to cauterize them".
And apply a poultice to the leg, and another to the chest. You must place a cushion under them.
The pain will be healed by cauterization.
If there are fistulas or other wounds in the rectum, the physician should apply a cautery to them.
So if it's a wound in the body they are dealing with, it is customary to call it a boil.
Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area on the foot, so that the cushion used for the treatment can be removed if necessary; and also apply a cautery to the ulcerated part of the body and make sure the hot cautery is properly applied. Then apply heat to the area around the abscess to help heal it.
And if the patient suffers from a fever or other ailments, do not apply the cautery to any part of the body that has a fever or inflammation.
And if you have to make a choice between the two sides, then you will use a cushion for one and leave them closed on the other, because it is the proper way to do it.
Then apply remedies to heal the plague in whatever part of the body it affects.
And if there are fistulas, let the surgeon cauterize the wound, but not the hands.
The shape of the fistula determines whether it requires cautery.
When hemorrhoids are present, there is bleeding.
And if it is necessary to treat the body or something else, you should apply a cushion to the legs. And in the legs, some small and some large, they are always cushions.
And these are the causes of pain in the legs, which are known as gouty.
Then have the patient lie on their back with their legs elevated on pillows or cushions. And then you cauterize those parts of the body that are affected by the pain, such as the legs or feet.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area if needed after the wound has healed. And another thing to treat an injury is by using the other method on the legs.
Then you will have treated the illness in the legs, and placed the cushion on their chest.
If they have light burns on their body, then the patient has a condition that doctors call a "leucorrhea" in the first few lines of the text.
When you have a boil on the body, use these methods: apply a cushion to the affected area.
Let him use a cushion on his legs, and let blood be drawn from other parts of his body.
And put them back in their place. And if the patient is suffering from gout, then apply the appropriate treatment.
And if it's necessary to use cushions for that ailment, they should be placed on the legs so that it doesn't spread.
When the body is injured by a sharp pain, treat the injury with a cautery so that the pain is less severe.
This sentence tells you how to treat an exposed intestine.
Then apply another cushion to their legs, for example.
The second part of the body, et al.
Then use a hot iron to cauterize the small lumps, the ones that look like warts, on the body, and another lump on the foot of the patient.
And for the treatment of the leg, you must apply a cushion to it, if necessary, so that the patient does not experience pain in their legs or feet. Then use fire or medicinal treatment on the patient's legs according to their condition.
If the patient has pain in the legs, they are burned by the cautery, and another doctor's hand should be placed on their body.
Then take a needle that has been opened and the contents are placed on a cushion; cover the patient’s foot with the needle to prevent the pain from being too strong, and you have already reached the limit of its range.
And if you want to draw blood from a vein, use a lancet or something similar.
If they are prone to making points on their legs, hold the patient's leg so that the opening does not allow the cushion to be placed.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, you should do so carefully.
And for the treatment of the intestines (of) that (which is) customary (for) treating other ailments, you will treat them with a regimen of poultices and such.
This sentence seems to be describing a medical procedure being performed on a child, mentioning both "small" and "large" tools for making "marks" or "incisions".
This sentence appears to be a mix of languages, likely Spanish and English. The guessed translation is:
Then let the patient be treated with these treatments for humors, and use proper care to avoid causing further harm.
And if you have an opening in your foot, which causes pain, it is called a burn.
And if it is customary for the animal to be in the presence of the beast, one should place a cushion on its back.
And if the patient's foot is opened by other means, such as a wound, you should put a bandage on it.
And if you need to treat the patient's bowels, place a cushion under them.
Then apply a cushion to their legs so that the intestines don't protrude.
And if it is necessary to apply medicine, use a cushion for support on his legs.
But if you are afflicted with pain in the legs, then the other (diseases) are healed by another method.
If there is pain in the bowels or intestines, the physician would apply heat to the affected area.
And then for the treatment of the plague.
You will see that I have been tasked to describe the process of treating diseases of the bowels.
The person has been given a diagnosis of gout.
And if it were the causes that are for the pain in the legs, or for the patient to be able to see other things, they may be used as a remedy.
Mays the pain in le legs be called by its proper name.
And if you have opened the intestine for surgery, then use the other to apply the cautery, and don't forget to protect the surrounding area.
This is a tricky one! It seems like the text is describing a medical procedure involving making the patient comfortable.
And if the pain is caused by a simple humor (and not from a complex one) then it is the patient who has to be treated for their illness.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery, then do so with cautery.
Avoid the use of meat or other foods that cause gout.
And apply cautery to the area above the cushion, where the affected area is inflamed and requires its use.
The doctor should treat the condition of the recent wound on the patient's feet.
And then place a cushion on them, while they are still healing, the patient needs to be given a cushion.
If the plague is severe, you are to treat them with a cut on the thigh, and if it is necessary to make incisions on their legs, use the technique of cauterization.
And so if it is a fever or other illness that causes pain in the feet, you should treat it with medicines to soothe the foot.
And if you place a cushion on their legs, apply another to the foot, but not to prevent it from being inflamed.
If there is pain in the thighs or other areas of the body, then you may have to cauterize them to stop the bleeding.
And if these skin eruptions are simple and small, it's said to be caused by that which is simply called "gout" elsewhere.
Then the patient's body should be treated with a poultice made of sulfurous powder to prevent the plague.
And if you have to use a cautery, apply it carefully and only when necessary.
Then use the other tools for the task at hand, and then you'll have to call it a day on the feet.
And then cauterize the necessary areas on the foot to prevent the pain from spreading.
And if they are on their back, or at least you must use a cushion to support them, saying that the affected area will be treated in the same way.
And if the patient is suffering from a broken bone, they must apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat a fractured bone in the head, then do so by using a cautery.
When the plague affects the feet, it is called gout.
If the plague affects the body, but the treatment varies.
If a patient has gout, applying cautery to the affected area may be necessary. Do not use medicine on the legs if you are not sure what is wrong with them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient with a mild ailment, another servant will administer medicines, while the other holds their legs, or et cetera, as needed.
If the pain is severe, treat it with cautery.
Mays if the disease is severe, the patient needs to be treated by a doctor.
Then if there is blood flowing from an open artery, it causes them to place their hand on the affected area.
When joints are to be cauterized or left closed, use suture for the latter.
Mays if the disease is gout, cauterize and apply a poultice to the affected area, and use another method of treatment.
And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the affected area. And if there is another pain in them, then you can use this to make an opening.
If there are pains in the legs or from the gouty pain, then know that the plague is a disease that can be fatal.
And if it is a recent illness, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if you have applied a poultice to the groin, apply another poultice on the other side, to prevent its spread.
When the doctors have been busy for three days after treating the plague, they are exhausted; one is more likely to be cured by placing a cushion under the affected area.
If the pain is relieved, then it's good; otherwise, the physician should treat the condition as a fistula.
E if the doctors have diagnosed a wound on the foot, it will be necessary to apply a poultice to treat it properly.
When the intestine has been opened and the patient's legs are cauterized, then you should remove your hand from the cushion. And if they are separated, we will stop the plague from spreading.
And other diseases that are treated by cauterization are those plagues that affect other parts of the body.
And for the plagues of the bowels.
The patient's illness, when on the feet, is called a gouty affliction.
And if there are small, sharp pains in the feet, they say it is gout.
E thus is the best translation: "And so the patient's bowels are treated in this way, they will be treated for their condition."
And then you have to suture the belly after the others are done.
And then there are two other sutures that are specific to them.
And I say, for every part of the body affected by it, you should apply a poultice to each one.
And then the doctor will tell you that he has reduced the hernia.
And so when the pain is in the feet, it is customary to call it ails.
Sometimes it affects the whole body with pain, especially the feet, which are treated by placing the foot on a cushion to avoid its movement.
And so when you have loosened the joint pain, apply another bandage to the legs and apply pressure.
Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids with care.
And so the patient's legs are open and a cushion is placed under them, then you should place another cushion under the other leg.
And if they have a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, that's what doctors call it when it's really happening in the joint.
One part of the body to be affected by gout or by other diseases, which are already severe in the feet.
And thus when the plague is aggravated, place your hand on their side to prevent further complications, et altre per le body's parts, but be careful.
When the pain is widespread, place the cushion on his lower abdomen; if it is in his upper abdomen, use a pillow to support him.
And if the pain is in one of the two parts of the body, it is necessary to consider the location of the disruption and apply a cauterization technique accordingly.
This line continues to give instructions on how to treat someone suffering from gout.
When there are small inflammations on the legs, use a small cautery to apply heat to the affected area.
E questa que s'usit per la dolor del dit: una puncta.
Then apply another cushion to the other side, so that the patient's body is properly supported by two cushions, one on each thigh.
The needles are applied to the body, starting with a small incision in the legs and another on the feet, if necessary.
And if it's necessary to treat the wound with a needle, one should use a cushion to avoid puncturing the skin too deeply.
And it is not good for them to have their limbs prolonged by swelling.
Then you will know that the patient has a cushion under their feet when they are being treated for something, and place another cushion on their legs to prevent gout from spreading.
These are the kinds of stitches used on the legs.
The second translation is: When joint pain is caused by the cold humors, it was called a "gout" when it is a point in the foot, but they are not all from the same cause.
Then return to that part of the body, and apply cushions under their feet, as needed for the patient's health.
Then apply your hand to their leg or foot to prevent them from moving.
And then apply heat to the men's legs and they will be healed.
And if a man's body is affected by plague, he has already been afflicted by the plague, and another has been placed on their thighs, and another on their legs, and then his bowels have been disrupted by the plague.
The plague was cured within fifteen days, or so, in the patient's legs after fifteen days they are healed
And if the other doctors had declared that the patient was beyond help, then they would have been treated with a poultice in the thigh, where the ailment was localized.
And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of cushion stitching.
And you must apply the needle to the patient's affected area, and use another cushion on their chest.
And if the needle penetrates to the tip, and it enters the joint and it is placed on the affected area, then apply it to the other part of the body;
If the intestine has been opened and you have placed a cushion under it, then use the following method to treat it.
And if you have opened the affected area by yourself, the patient should be placed on a cushion.
And if there is a need to cauterize a patient's first line by opening them up, then you must place the cushion under their other side.
And so the patient's gut was burned and cauterized, and the surgeon placed a cushion on their body and another on their feet to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin with a needle.
And so, a second type of cautery is recommended for him.
You will find that the needle has gone into the part of the body where the pain is located.
The intestine is already closed, and hold your hand over the patient's abdomen to prevent the spread.
This method of stitching is better than common light stitching.
This is the text about the condition known as gout.
When you cauterize a patient's abdomen, it is customary to place a cushion under their abdomen.
You already know that the pain in the legs is harder to treat than elsewhere.
And the treatment for the plague will be a judgment on the other plagues.
Then, place a cushion under the patient's affected area, and if necessary to treat them, use a cautery.
And if the patient has already been affected by the plague, you have to make sure that they are treated by a doctor immediately when there's an outbreak in the region.
This is a reference to gout being a disease caused by an imbalance in bodily humors.
Then use a poultice to draw out the heat from the body or something like that.
When there is pain or swelling in the patient's legs, apply a poultice to them, and use a hot cushion for a poultice application on the affected area.
And the pain in the larger joints (like knees) is easier to cure than the pain that arises from the stomach or other internal organs.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
The bubonic plague has left many dead in its wake.
When there is pain in the legs or joints, use a hot bath to soothe them.
And if they are suffering from a disease that affects the intestines or joints, apply leeches to their limbs to relieve them.
Then remember to apply heat to the area between the patient's legs.
If there are red blotches or swelling on the leg or legs of a patient that have been treated for gout, the intestine or intestines can be made to open in the foot and then you may need to cauterize the intestine using a cushion on the leg(s) and with other treatments.
Then apply a poultice to their legs and a cushion to them, cauterize the surface and stop the suffering from spreading.
And if a wound in the leg becomes infected, then you should treat it with a cushion for the belly and hold its hands over the area.
The text describes applying a poultice to the affected area, likely using the term "gout" in a broader sense of joint pain or inflammation, which could be caused by various factors.
And another place for the cushion is on their feet, which they must keep still, as long as the cushion is needed to hold them closed.
Then apply that treatment to the affected area, but make sure the patient's leg remains closed during the process.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, it's possible that they are inflamed (from the burning) by a subtle/fine needle which causes pain, so apply a hot cautery to the area.
Then use this method to prevent further complications from ants.
When there are many plagues, it's important to remember that gout is only one type of plague and may require different treatment than other plagues.
The text suggests that the patient has an open wound treated by applying a hot poultice to its area.
If you know that something is truly a problem, it is called an "ancient" disease.
And if a wound is caused by a true fistula, which is a hard, painful lump, it is already treated.
E in some men, the humor spreads to the arms; and in others, the intestines are affected. And sometimes this cushion is placed on the thighs, and another is used for the legs, and another for the stomach.
When in doubt, consult the original text.
Here comes the first line of the text: It is said that if you have a fistula on their legs, the physician will know how to treat it.
And if one needs to treat a patient in the body, it's done with a cautery.
Therefore, that which is a fistula in this manner requires treatment by knowledge (of medicine), not by this method.
If you are a doctor and the patient has a condition that causes pain in their legs, they should be treated by applying heat to them.
Mays es que leas a lahuas per lo c'ha una cosa subtil.
Then you have opened the space between the legs of the patient, but if the fistula is in the body, it is necessary to cauterize.
Then take care to place a cushion under the patient's intestine, for the other parts are about to be burned.
"Then inquire carefully about the location of the pain or any sores, for it is possible that a sore could be causing the fistula to appear."
And so the doctor treats them, applying heat to the nearby joint.
Then return to the patient and offer what you have learned about the nature of his or her ailment.
Then use a long instrument to reach the deep parts of the fistula and administer medicine to its opening.
And if there are other physicians present, they have already opened the intestine or leg area to make a cushion for them.
A good sign that they are healed is when the patient can stand on their legs again after the procedure.
Mays is likely a misspelling of "Maybe," which would make the translation:
If a doctor needs to treat a patient with a condition in the veins or nerves, they should do so as previously described.
When the foot bones are affected, you must cauterize them.
Then the physician cauterizes the affected area to reduce the pain.
And if it doesn’t heal, cauterize it.
And if it is necessary to remove the bone, they will be removed by careful instruments.
And if you have already opened the bowels of a patient, who suffers from an ailment caused by humors, apply another cushion to their legs, as it is necessary to treat such a condition.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then apply the cautery to the areas around the injury.
Another way to say this, another way to say that, of the patient's body, there is need for Egyptian ointment.
But if he applies a burning iron to the bones of his body, then the physician will apply a cautery to their location, so that he may cure the plague of those which have been infiltrated by the cushion of plague.
When the intestine is corrupted, it causes pain in the feet and ankles.
Then you may apply cauterization to a man's body, but make sure to use a cushion to protect them from injury.
Then make sure to cauterize his legs and feet, so that the patient's body does not cause them to be inflamed.
When the doctor has been given the name for the body part, they will apply a cautery to that area.
And then the doctor will apply a cushion to the patient's legs so that they don't open their place.
And I saw the other sources for the medical treatise are in Latin, but also use Italian words for specific ailments.
And then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then bring your hand close to the affected area and carefully apply cautery to the entire leg.
And then the doctor would apply a poultice to the joint, so that the pain would be relieved by cauterizing the affected area.
And then you should apply a cautery to the exposed bone, or the area where the bone needs to be heated.
Then place a cushion under the patient's foot and apply pressure to the joints.
And then if you have to place a cushion on them, and keep the restoration in their cavity for a long time.
And if the patient has been treated for a while (with) their illness, he will be ill from the second time to the third, and then will be completely healed.
And if a wound has opened up on the body, one would treat it by applying leeches to the area affected by the infection.
And then if the pain is in the foot, it is often called gout; if they are in their legs, they are treated with a cushion under them, and if they are on the other parts of the body, they are treated lightly.
And it is not necessary to make further points in the operation if the patient has pain from the operation itself.
And so the patient's body is now in balance, their flesh not inflamed, and their bones properly aligned.
When a bone protrudes outwards, it is customary to call it a bone spur.
Then cauterize the area of the affected joint, but don't cauterize the intestines.
The word "serradura" refers to the foot being placed in a higher position than the body, which is typical of a patient suffering from gout.
If a wound is already discovered in the body and you must stop the bleeding, apply pressure to the wound with your hand.
And if there is an injury to the legs, one should use a bandage to protect the injury.
If the pain is in the joints, apply cautery to the affected area, which should be treated with caution.
When there is a pain in the legs, it is caused by a continuous imbalance of humors.
Then bring the patient to your chest, and place another cushion under them.
This text means: I have learned that for the first signs of pain in the joints, apply cautery to the area where the bones are located, and use a tool appropriate to the situation.
Then you have to know that this is what the art of medicine is all about; when there is an opening in the body, it's convenient for the doctors to use a cushion on the feet.
And then you will treat the patient's thighs with a cushion, and you will find out what causes the pain. And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the legs, et autre on their feet, use these methods.
When your hand is placed on the affected area for pain relief, use a hot stone or other methods to reduce inflammation.
A form of large saw.
A sharp pain in the legs of the body is called gout. This is a very complex case requiring careful attention.
A hot compress is used for pain in the legs,  a practice they call cauterization, to make the cushion feel pain.
A form of treatment for pain in the legs, done by placing cushions beneath them.
Shape of a razor.
When there is pain in the joints, one should use a cushion to protect the legs from injury. When you use a hot cautery on the body, it is called gout in the case of gouty arthritis, which affects the joints, and another type of pain when it affects the feet.
Shape of the body (likely referring to a patient), where there is an infiltration of humor:
This is a tricky one! I'll do my best:
This is a description of a method for treating a disease, likely gout by its description as caused by "cold humors".
To apply a cautery instrument to the body in a way that resembles a tent.
And so for the second time I will try to guess its meaning:
And if it is necessary to make incisions into the thigh, and you place a cushion on their limbs, carefully apply another cushion at the edges of the wound and the other leg, etc.
Then apply a sharp instrument to make incisions on the body, and apply a hot cushion to the wound.
The first sentence translates to: then he/she will be able to tell where the pain is located in the body.
And if there are cushions for the legs, then they should be used to apply pressure.
The cushion will be placed on the legs, or upon the bones.
Then return the patient's leg to its natural position.
When the physician sees that a joint pain is caused by humors in the limbs.
And if there are other things that cause pain, like a scorpion sting or a similar injury, the patient should be treated with another type of treatment.
And if on their fingertip, or the area around the toe, the pain occurs in the joint but does not spread to other parts of the body, you may call it a cushion.
And similarly if it's necessary to cauterize the area under their hand in the body.
And if you are cauterizing the patient's leg or arm, they should be positioned on their arms to prevent them from moving.
And if the other's illness has spread to the foot, burning it with a cauterizer will be necessary.
And similarly, apply a cautery to the affected area when the ailment is in the foot.
And apply a cautery to the whole foot. May you be experiencing the pain caused by the use of cupping therapy, or another condition?
Then apply heat to the area on their legs, but know that you must allow the patient's hands to be used for other purposes.
And the manner of cutting into a limb is that you apply a cauterizer to the area where the incision will be made.
And if there are points made on the body, it is called gout.
Mays if you cauterize the blood it will be applied to the area; otherwise, the blood may flow out too much.
And apply it to the affected area if needed, and hold their hands while the cautery is applied.
This practice was used in cases of fire in the body.
And then the physician should place his hand on the patient's legs to prevent the pain from spreading to their feet.
If one leg hurts from the severity of the pain of gout, he should be cauterized to prevent the wound.
Lon pain in the legs and feet is caused by cold humors.
And so, if you have to reduce the swelling in the body below the skin, the surgeon's knife will also be used for that purpose.
And if the patient’s leg has been opened by them, and a cushion has been placed on their legs, but they are still alive.
And if the patient has been afflicted, he will be healed by cauterizing the affected area.
And then apply the cushion to the body (of the patient) in order to reduce their pain.
On their treatment and prevention.
And if it is necessary to put a cushion under another under the chest, and place a bandage on the cushion so that the patient will not suffer from a lack of a proper bandage.
However, if the pain in the body continues to affect the intestines, it is called a fistula.
Translation: And if the pain in the feet is severe, they will be called to apply a cautery to the affected area.
Then if you are using a clyster to remove a blockage in the body, you should use a heated instrument for treatment.
Then apply a poultice of the herbs to draw out the inflammation and pain relief.
Then let the patient's bowels be washed with water and honey.
And now place a cushion under those (suffering from gout) to stop them from feeling pain in their legs and feet.
Then return the patient to their room; the cushion should be placed on the water, and the other on the legs.
If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian treatment, then they are to be treated by applying a poultice, followed by the use of a hot iron and a final application of a honey-water mixture, and if the excess is in the form of dryness and cinders, it will be necessary to apply a solution of vinegar and water.
And if the bowels are inflamed and painful, place a clyster on them.
And then apply a poultice to the legs.
And if the patient's foot is swollen, they should be treated by applying a cautery with a small, hot iron to reduce the pain.
Then similarly place a cushion under the intestine.
And if a patient's body has been affected by the evil spirits, then cleanse the wound or its cavity.
Then prepare the arm with which the patient will be treated.
May this be applied to the patient's whole body, and another on their legs, and another holding the other one on the foot. And know you that if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines.
Then you will consider whether or not there is pain in the patient's legs.
Then apply the treatment to your patient in that manner, and use cushions to support their body.
And if you are a man of science, you know the place between the thigh and the leg to be a part of the body where gout may affect someone in the way we are accustomed to seeing it.
"Then use the other tools to help the patient if they are suffering from indigestion."
And if you are treating the patient for an injury, place your hand on the sick part to prevent further complications.
This passage describes the use of medical tools and practices.
And sometimes these herbs are used to treat gout.
And if you are able to heal the corrupted part, place a bandage on the wound.
And they come to the patient's thighs and legs.
The first part of the foot treatment involves placing cushions on the body to prevent the spread of the infection, and another cushion on the patient's feet.
Then if you don't want to use your own hands, use another method of cauterization.
If the bone is cold and damp, then apply a hot poultice to the affected area and warm it up.
And if illness has already entered the bones, then you must cauterize them.
If there is swelling between the toes, apply heat to the affected area.
When the pain is severe in the toe, you will need to apply a cautery on the big toe and treat the patient with appropriate remedies for the disease.
And if they are ill, they say it's due to the heat of their body.
A pointed tool was used to treat ailments, such as gout, by applying it to the affected area. And if someone has a body part that is affected by cold humors, they are likely to experience pain in their feet.
And for those who are born fleshy, it is said to be gout.
Mays the pain in the patient's legs is difficult to treat; it requires careful attention from a physician.
Mays, in that case, if you want to treat a patient with a rounded burn on their foot, use the appropriate cauterizing tools for treatment or apply a poultice to their foot.
So, when the intestine is inflamed, inflammation is treated by applying a cushion to the affected area, which is often painful, but can also be caused by a natural process of healing in the human body.
And if you separate the skin from the bones, you will cause pain to the one who has been injured.
And similarly if you have a strong pain in the legs, it is called by another name for the condition.
Then treat the illness caused by imbalances in the humors.
Vices can be found in many forms, but they often appear on the legs or feet of travelers.
Then apply a tourniquet to their legs if necessary, for the plague.
And so the treatment for the ailment involves pain in the joints, and the other way to do it is to apply heat to the affected area by using a cushion.
When applying a cauterization to the foot, the patient should be treated with a hot cautery.
And then lay on him a bandage or cushion to make the humors stay in.
E itera la cura per sanguinaria per lo corpo del patient.
If the patient has pain in the leg, they are to be treated as follows: first, you should heat up the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the body, one should use a lancet to make incisions in the area where the pain is located.
Then place the cushion on their legs, and then cauterize the blood vessels to that area as needed.
And when you're done, apply cauterization to the other parts as needed.
And you have already made your bed for the patient, as long as the pain is in the legs, then place them on their cushions.
And then you must apply a hot iron to the three parts of the body: the foot, the knee, and the chest.
Then carefully elevate the foot and another applies a bandage on the second wound.
And then apply the cauterizer to the upper part of the body, and place your hand on the lower part.
If you are experiencing pain in the joints, especially if it's sharp pain in your feet that feels like it's spreading, the use of a hot cautery on the affected area can help. And if it affects the foot, and you have to make incisions, then apply a cushion to the area where the incision is being made on the patient; and place your hands on their legs.
And when the pain is gone, the illness is subdued.
And if the pain is in the joints, then it is called gout, if there are other cushions that are needed.
Guard yourself from making such mistakes, for that is how to truly help them.
Causing pain in the feet, which are the parts most affected by gout, is a sign that it is the patient’s own fault.
A person who has a bad mood should avoid treating others harshly.
On the legs.
This disease arises in hot countries as gout, which is produced by an excess of humors in the legs, is also known as "gutta" by physicians.
And it is caused by the other parts of the body.
And then the opening of the foot is made to be placed in a cushion.
E senhal de la l'adveniment de la sua inflammation of the vena caused by cold or dampness; e le use this method to treat the affected area: e if you are treating a patient with a strong attack of pain, and the cause is the advection of blood in a limb, it suggests that the patient has an imbalance in their humors.
And then when you have treated the foot, apply bandages to hold it in place.
And if there are pains in the legs or joints, it is necessary to use a cushion and apply heat to the affected area. And if the pain is severe, you should apply a hot cautery to the affected area, which would be treated with a cushion.
If a doctor deems it necessary to treat the body's ailments, he should apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
And from these other veins they are applied to the body for pain in the legs or feet.
Then you must treat the area where the intestine was opened with that poultice.
When blood flows to the legs, it is customary for it to cause pain in the joints.
And if this is what we have said about the treatment of gout.
And when treating the condition of a worm infestation of the skin, it is called "Dejections due to cutaneous humors".
In some places, they call it a disease of the humors, but others call it gout, which is caused by an imbalance of the four humors in the body: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.
And if there are bad humors in the stomach or intestines, they are treated by applying a cautery to their feet.
When there are pains in the body, the doctor will raise your hand to the head, to keep the pain away from the patient's legs (and the doctor would also hold their hand) while the patient keeps a cushion between their legs and another on their chest.
And if you wish to cure that which is on the foot, then use this method.
And if there is pain in the body that are affected by the fire of the cautery, you must know that it is a cushion for the patient's liver.
Then return the patient's intestines to their proper place, and place a cushion on their feet.
On the matter of the pain in the intestines caused by gout.
This illness moves through the body, affecting various parts.
And you see, sir, that I have seen the pain of the second type in your legs, which are caused by other things than gout. And I saw that if the pain was in the veins of the leg, she would place her hand on the area to prevent the intestine from being exposed.
And then apply cautery to that area for an hour.
And then place a bandage on the patient's other arm.
And place the cushion in the patient's body so that it is placed on their foot. When the knee joint has been treated in this way, I have seen it work well for some patients. The patient's legs are being treated as if they were a woman.
And if you have already opened her up, and are thinking about applying a cautery to her body.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the intestine, do so carefully.
The “cushion” in Translation 3 refers to a cushion of herbs or other medicinal substances placed under the affected area to draw out the pain.
Then, if you do not apply the other cushions to the patient's legs, it is customary to call it the second cause for using cushions in treating illness.
On treating gout.
Arrows are treated differently by doctors depending on their type, whether they have sharp points or are blunt, as well as three angles that are sharp,
And when the patient's body needs to be cauterized, one places a cushion on their legs, so that they don't move and thus cause harm.
And if you see these signs, let the patient be given a name to the wound by the arrow, and another by the other signs, but only if necessary.
If you are in pain from the plague, we will use a poultice to treat it.
And the vessels that are near to the lungs are already full of foam and pus.
And if it is the foot, then you should apply the cautery to the small intestine, e.g., another, not to the whole body, but only to the affected areas.
If the arrow is in the stomach, then it is a sign that the cushion of the body is ill-placed.
This is a tricky one! It seems like the sentence about the metrical translation you provided is actually a bit off in terms of meaning.
If there is another cause for the arrow to be removed from the bladder, the patient's legs will be cut, it is said that it is fatal.
The patient's body was affected by the venom or poison in the vein.
And I will show you the treatment for the illness caused by these arrows.
This refers to the cause of a man's ailment being in his nose.
When the patient has a pain in their legs, place cushions underneath them, and when applying cautery, be careful to avoid burning the skin.
When the Juizeu was diagnosed with a gout attack in their legs, they were taken care of by doctors, but if you are experiencing a fever, do not hesitate to seek medical attention.
And if you have made a poultice for the feet, then apply a poultice to the patient's chest, and so the cautery is applied to the joint in order to relieve pain.
And if you want to cure a man by applying another arrow to his body, place a cushion under him and hold his body in that position.
And if you have a wound on the back of your leg, then apply heat to the wound.
And if the woman has a pain in her abdomen, she should be treated by a skilled physician.
And if there are other wounds on the body, apply the cushion to those wounds and keep the patient warm.
And you placed a cushion on the man's right leg, and he already had his bowels aching and his body was full of pain.
And if you have to use a cautery tool on the legs, it should be done after three days.
Then I found the other arrow was for the body, and I placed a healing salve on them.
And apply a plaster to soothe the location where the wound is.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to treat an ailment that affects the feet, it should be done in such a way that the cushion does not touch the skin directly.
Then one should carefully place the cushion on the patient's legs or elsewhere.
And so you apply that treatment to their legs, which will be done with another medicine for the thigh area.
When you apply pressure to the bandage on their legs, it will be applied to the skin.
And if the cartilage in the nose is damaged, they say it is due to a cause that is known as gout.
E in this way, the patient's body will be purged of those humors that are hidden.
And if the pain is severe, they will put you on a diet to reduce the inflammation.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not harmful to the body unless they are lodged in a joint.
And if it is necessary to apply the cushion on the legs, then place it upon their chest, and make sure they don't move too much.
And if the body's humors do not subside after a few days, it is considered necessary by doctors to use cauterization.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or to apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located.
And if you do not obey the orders given to the surgeon, who will then use a subtle tool on the patient's legs for the operation.
Mays la cònscience of the doctor is needed to cure le malaute.
And if the arrow cannot be removed by the hand, they are to use heat to draw out the poison.
And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the legs for pain relief, use it if you wish; otherwise, you may use it on your feet.
And then if you must extract something from the patient's body, such as a bullet, use the tongs to remove the object.
When it is not possible to cure the disease immediately, let it be treated for several days. And so, if there's pain in their feet, they are treated by the doctor for that.
Then do as you can to cauterize the intestine or cushion where your hand is placed.
And so that the pain in the legs may be lessened by the use of fire. Then apply cold compresses to the affected area.
Then, if the pain is severe, apply forceps to the affected area.
And if it is opened up in the bone, then you should apply cautery to that area.
And so it continues to be treated for alcus days.
If the pain is in the foot, apply a cautery to that area.
The physician will now treat the affected area with a cauterizing tool called a cauteri.
When the arrow is pointed at them, they will be relieved if you apply something to their foot.
If your body is affected by a sickness that causes swelling and pain, then you are treating its surface.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, or near the leg, so that you can treat it.
A form of tongs is used to apply the arrows to the affected area.
Let the pain be found in their limbs, let them be treated with fire by the surgeon.
And if you have a wound on the foot, apply a bandage to the affected area.
And so that the patient's foot may be relieved from pain, it is necessary to apply a cushion to their legs and other treatments to address the underlying cause.
And about bloodletting from the veins.
And if there are other causes for the pain, such as inflammation in the veins, then apply cold poultices to the affected area. And for the patient's bowels to be saved from being affected by the other.
And if there are three veins in the foot, one for the wild gout; the other for the domestic gout; the third for the hip joint, which is a place where the pain of the sciatic is located.
When the veins are inflamed or painful, apply the other treatments.
Then the patient's blood will be drawn from them by the doctor, and a bandage should be applied to the area around the ankle, and another to the spot on the foot where pain occurs.
Then take the lancet from the patient's thigh. And apply a cautery to the affected area. And let the patient be adjusted by the two aforementioned cushions.
Then place your hand under the patient's legs to ensure they are properly healed.
And already begun in the book, the treatment of them begins with their legs being treated by a cushion.
When pain occurs in the foot, two things are usually done to address it: a cauterization and applying a cushion under them.
You can understand the meaning of what the patient feels or experiences: You have already seen if the patient has pain in their feet, another person must be present to feel their pulse.
And for the codena you should apply a cushion according to your need, and if it's necessary to make incisions on the legs, then use a fleubotomi.
And if the patient's legs are swollen or inflamed, apply a poultice to their feet for one hour.
And already they are remembering the pain in their legs and feet.
And if it is necessary to bleed the vein in the forehead, that is what they will call a phlebotomy by doctors.
And the nature of the patient's illness be it as it may, the quality of the treatment of the ailment depends on what kind of disease you have in mind.
And keep the vein closed off from the touch, for it is painful.
And so you must apply heat to their feet when treating those suffering from the disease of the gout.
When there is a need to treat an eye infection or inflammation, it is customary to use cautery.
The quality of the bandage is important for preventing infection.
Then apply a bandage to their arm, using another bandage for the thigh.
And if it is necessary to make a treatment for a fever, it should be applied to the area for an entire night.
And the treatment for fever in the face by fire cupping is known to be a treatment for fevers in the nose.
And if the patient's body is opened up by means of bloodletting, apply a bandage to the area.
This text describes how to perform a surgical procedure for treating pain caused by gout.
Mays le apply pressure to the foot with a cushion.
Then the quality of the health of the patient will be better for the physician.
And apply a cushion to the affected area in small amounts.
And if the patient's foot has been treated for a while, but the pain returns, it is healed.
And you have already placed a cushion on the patient's chest, while they were still suffering from the effects of a cut to the veins.
The type of wound that causes pain in the feet is called gout.
If the patient has doubts about the nature of the pain, then a cautery should be used on the body.
And apply a cautery to those veins which are located in the lips, or other parts.
And if the patient has gout, they will be treated by the physician for their ailments.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on the affected area, it should be done in such a way that the incision is clean and the wound heals properly.
Then, for those parts of the body affected by the cold humors, you should apply it (the cushion) to the area.
And if the patient has an attack of gout, apply heat to the affected area; if they are being treated by cauterization, it is a common practice for doctors to place their hand on the limb of the patient.
And apply heat to the body through the veins and nerves when they are affected by an excess of humors.
And you must apply a cauterization to the delicate veins if there are signs of delicate vein problems in the patient's foot.
Then apply a cauterizer to the veins, arms, and legs.
And if you want to be safe, one should apply the cautery to the patient's foot, but only if necessary.
And if there are signs of a visible abscess on their limbs, then apply a poultice to draw out the infection.
The bloodletting was done on the arms to reduce pain in the arms and legs.
Then, since the patient has an illness related to the limbs, a cushion should be placed on their legs if they have pain in the area.
And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, place a cushion under their head.
And take care of the patient for several days with the use of this other cushion.
When your blood has been chilled by cold, it is possible to get gout, so keep the affected area warm.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the leg, use a cushion on the thigh, but the patient needs to be positioned in such a way that they do not have a burn injury.
And the pain in the legs will be difficult to treat because of the cushion on their foot.
The bloodletting should be performed on the arms, as we said.
This one is difficult to adjust to English directly but it can be interpreted as "And if it is hidden, a bloodletting will be performed on the thighs or other areas, which is usually a difficult cure."
And if it is necessary to bleed a vein, one should use a cushion on the thighs.
Leeches are applied to the head for bloodletting.
If you wish to cauterize a patient's legs or feet, then use a pointed cautery; otherwise, do not.
Mays empero means "But in men"
The first line means: "The other cushion is for the patient's illness" and refers to the bloodletting practice being performed on the leg, rather than the arm.
Then make the necessary incisions for three days to remove the excess fluid from the body.
The time or place for performing bloodletting is not important.
The practice is to cauterize the patient's legs and feet, which are held down by cushions.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot or elsewhere, use another cushion for the feet.
And if you wish to treat those ailments with surgery, then it is necessary to cauterize the opening or the patient's body.
Then consider applying a hot poultice to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the legs, then place a cushion or cushion-like object under them.
So perform phlebotomy on their feet, for that is where the bloodletting should be done.
The animals have already been treated for animal ailments in the animals' limbs on that day.
And if it's necessary to cauterize something, it is done by using the traditional methods.
Therefore, let the physician apply leeches to the patient's affected areas.
Then place a cushion on the arm of the patient's leg, and apply the other to their arms.
And if the pain occurs in the legs, it is called constipation.
And if there's pain in the legs, use another poultice to bring down the swelling.
And if the patient's leg is swollen, apply the bloodletting to the veins as needed.
Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these matters.
And if you cauterize the vein, then you hold a hot iron to the skin to make the incision bleed.
If the patient has a wound that requires lancing, let them be lanced, or if necessary, treat the inflammation with a cauterization.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area to bring relief to the patient's pain.
And if you place a cushion on their legs when they are swollen, don't worry about the pain.
When there is inflammation in the body, it is customary to apply a poultice to the affected area. And they are best treated with oil by other means.
And similarly, in all wounds, a poultice of oil should be applied to those who are being cauterized.
E if the patient has a large swelling in the location where the cautery was applied, apply a poultice of herbs to the affected area.
And apply heat to that vein (or other veins) using a hot iron.
And if you wish to stop the pain, use the poultice made of myrrh.
The basilica is where the surgeon places his hand during a fleubotomia.
And so apply the cushion to the affected area, to stop the pain in your body.
And let the wound be cauterized so that it may heal.
And so, for those who are curious, we will translate the word "extra."
And if you have to open the body to treat black blood, place your hand on the affected area.
And if there is need to draw blood from the body, it is customary to perform venesection on the patient.
And if you have pain in your legs, apply a cushion to them, and keep it covered.
And if it is necessary to open the vein for surgery, it should be done by cutting, not by burning.
This practice, known as bloodletting by the ancients, was done to stop bleeding in the body.
Then place a cushion under the patient's leg to prevent it from being affected.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, if necessary, place a cushion under them.
Then, if the patient has symptoms, you should perform bloodletting on the legs.
And use for the treatment of syncope, the other causes are to be treated by opening them up.
If you want to treat a patient with a poultice, it is customary to call it gout.
Mays that the patient's arm should be bled for seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting, it is necessary to perform a second.
Here comes the second sentence:
Mays that when there are humors in the foot, the pain will be relieved by placing a cushion under the feet.
And if you are applying cautery to the patient's arm, apply it gently so as not to cause further pain with excessive force.
When the patient's blood is drawn for treatment, it is customary to place a cushion under their legs.
Gout affects the veins in the feet and causes pain.
Then apply a hot poultice to the other arm if they are already suffering from an ailment caused by cold.
And if you have placed a cushion on their arms or legs, then apply the poultice to them.
And the nature of bloodletting is to apply a cushion on their legs for healing.
And if there's tightness in the joints, which is what they call "strengths" (fleumbo) in the small intestine.
You are placing the patient's body on another person's chest, and you are opening the cavity where they have a small intestine.
E si es that the patient must be held back from the heat, then put your hand in the water.
When the days are hot, they say you should put your feet in hot water and that's how to cure them.
And so apply your cauteries to the feet, and a bandage on their legs.
When the right side of the body is affected by pain, it is customary for doctors to call it a case of jaundice in the right arm.
And its nature is to be a pain in the feet; if you want to treat that, apply warmth to their feet, and place a cushion under them, etc.
And if the body's humors are too cold, and the pain spreads to the feet, then the patient should be treated with a cautery on their legs.
And if it is necessary to repeat the hot water treatment, it should be done by placing a cushion under their hands, and another on their legs, so that you can see if the blood flow is stopped.
And similarly if it is necessary to make a cut on the foot, one must be done below the knee, another on the leg, and another on the foot itself, which is the correct practice of the physician.
May the left side be treated with an incision on the vein, and the left side is related to the spleen.
And for the other parts of the body, it is done the same way.
And if the patient has an old wound or injury to their leg, use a cushion for support.
And the pain that comes from the humors being present in the body is called "la qualitat" by doctors.
And so you will cauterize the opening in their legs, and another will be used for the cushion.
When the patient has pain in their legs, then place a cushion on the patient's knees and use a hot instrument to treat them if they have a fever.
And if you need to apply cautery to the legs, apply it carefully and gently.
Mays if it is necessary to make points for the release of the humors from which the patient suffers.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, they should repeat the procedure on their arm; and another on their legs.
And if it is similar to gout, then it should be called as such.
And if the sciatic vein is open, it is called sciatica.
And the young person's veins are opened to let out their blood.
And the nature of the disease that makes them suffer will be known.
Therefore, when you apply the treatment, do so across the width of the body, as in the case of a cushion being placed under them.
And if the patient's foot becomes painful, leave the leg alone.
And when you have placed the cushion on their legs, let them be kept away from the body's nerves.
Then apply a bandage to the leg after surgery.
Of the treatment of flatulence and the use of cushions in medicine.
And for corns, it is from the metatarsals to the toes.
The text suggests using cushions and other tools to treat the pain.
And if there is a need to treat the body with cautery, one must be careful not to burn the patient's feet.
And if you are experiencing gout, apply cauterization to the affected area, which requires a cushion for the cushion to be applied on.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
The text describes applying treatment for gout, which is likely to be a medical condition related to pain in the limbs.
Therefore, when the air is cold, apply commands to the body.
And if the patient's neck is affected by the pain, another place to be cauterized is the nape of their neck; otherwise, the head is affected.
This pain in the legs is caused by phlebotomy from the cephalic vein.
And if he is a man who has a cold humor, put a cushion on his chest.
And it's by fire that the illness of the bones is known to be cured.
And if the pain continues in the legs, be careful to apply heat.
This medical treatment uses cushions to treat pain through the application of alcohol and other techniques.
And if the pain is caused by the other or the cushion placed on the affected limb, then you should use a hot compress.
Glands are treated by physicians for pain in the limbs.
And command the cauterizer to treat the patient carefully so as not to cause a blood flow to the legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the lips, they should use a different type of cautery than when treating other conditions.
And if it is necessary to apply spatulas to the feet, it is best done by a skilled practitioner.
And if you wish to draw blood from the two parts of the body, those are the three veins.
And command the surgeon to cauterize the flesh where the incision was made, because the pain may be relieved by placing a cushion under the patient's arms.
And place a cushion under the patient's legs.
When you are skilled in the art of using a cauterizer, be careful with a gentle touch; otherwise, the pain will be severe.
Guessed Translation:  When applying poultices to all parts of the body, use small ones for the thighs and legs; and use a bandage for the treatment of his/her knees.
For otherwise, if the cushion is placed on their legs, they are weak.
And from them the young man has a cushion placed under his legs.
And if the cushion be placed on the body in such a way that it is applied to the patient's legs, e.g., the pain be caused by the joint being affected by the feet. Then apply a hot cautery to the cavity between the legs.
Then apply a cushion on the patient's legs, gradually opening the intestine, and gently draw back the patient's limbs.
If you want to avoid having your body be afflicted by illness, you must cauterize the area where the pain occurs.
And tell the one who applies leeches to use a sharp tool to make more cuts if necessary.
And if there's swelling in the legs, apply gentle cauterization to the area. When pain occurs in the legs or other parts of the body, it is customarily called...
And if the blood is too thick, perform a bloodletting on the third time you see the patient, as they may be suffering from the ailment of gout.
And then apply a cautery to their legs slowly.
And if you wish to draw out the pain by means of bloodletting, apply a cushion to his chest, use these other things for that purpose.
And here's the depth of the bloodletting, which is done only on the feet.
When there is a need for treatment with a cushion, apply your ointment to protect the skin from the burning of the fire.
And if it's a large intestine or colon, you can apply cautery to the other parts.
If the pain is in the joints and caused by cold humors, it is called gout.
The pain in the feet is caused by cold humors.
And for those who have large amounts of excess fluid (phlegm) in their body, they are to be treated with herbs, poultices, or cushions.
You must treat the body with a hot cushion, and for that you need to be careful about applying the treatment.
And you should apply a cushion to their legs and a hot poultice on the area to be cauterized.
At the onset, consider if the patient is suffering from fever or pain in the limbs.
Then apply heat to the body to draw out the humors.
And if it is necessary to treat someone's feet, they should be treated with the same care as those who suffer from gout.
And if the patient has a fever, they are to drink less.
E if they are necessary to treat the body with cauteri.
Perhaps it means: If the patient has an ailment that causes pain in their liver or another part of their body, then use a poultice and apply it to their liver, and so on for other ailments.
And if you have to cauterize the foot or other areas for that matter, use the hot cautery on them, as well as those areas further up their leg, where the pain is most severe.
And then he placed cushions on their legs to support them.
E semblantment fa when you burn a cushion to soothe their pain.
And these applications should only be done with suction cups.
Then apply the cautery to their legs.
The patient's illness is caused by hot humors, so apply a cautery to their legs.
Forma de ventoza es un tipo de coyssi palpably large, while other things are done to their legs, the other should be placed with the foot held down by a cushion.
Then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located so that the other persons can see the patient's position.
And if it is on the legs of a patient, another fire-place for cautery.
And if it is a severe case of inflammation; for example, when it affects the feet.
And they have put cupping glasses on their legs, and you place them on their feet.
The quality of making a mark on the body with fire is that it is better to cauterize with wood than with hot wax.
The doctor should place their hand on the area where the bloodletting was done to stop blood from flowing out of the body, and avoid the other uses of the word "tract" in the text.
And if the patient's legs are affected, repeat the process for the other leg as well.
Then return the patient's intestines to their proper place if they have pain.
This is the way to treat it: use a cupping method to draw out the wind from the body, as this will make it better.
Chapter 97.
The patient's blood was drawn to treat the pain in their joints.
And if the condition is found in the patient's feet, they are called gout, because those joints are where the pain has been placed.
Then if the patient's legs were spread apart, they are to be treated by applying cupping in the evening when there is pain at the time of day.
Then apply the cushion to their legs, and so on.
And if it's possible for the patient to be treated with a venesection, just use a cushion.
Then, if there is still swelling after applying vinegar to the chest, you apply a cold compress to the affected area.
And if the patient has leg pain, apply leeches to that area.
When blood is dried up, you apply cauteries to the affected area.
And if you must use leeches, do so with care.
And if leeches are used on the joints, they should be placed with fresh blood for them to be effective.
And when you are finished, apply aloe vera to the area.
And thus begins the treatment of the disease called a tertia. This chapter is necessary for understanding dislocations in the body's joints.
O son the foot pains caused by excess of blood in the feet.
And so, when they are ill, the physicians treat them by applying cauterization to the affected area.
E si tu another placed a cushion under their legs.
Then I have already described what is in my knowledge about it.
This refers to the beginning of the chapter in the original language's text.
And the rest of the body must be treated for pain in the legs and feet. This text is a medieval medical treatise describing the use of cautery for treating ailments.
Then apply a cauterization to the body where necessary, and another should be placed on the legs, for example, under their feet, if you are treating someone with a dislocated joint, or as they call it, a "dislocation."
And if you wish to treat them by applying heat to the joints, let it be done with herbs, and another treatment on the affected limb, which can be used for other ailments.
And so then apply a cautery to the affected part, and another cushion under the patient's chest.
When gout is caused by internal coldness, place your hand over the area to prevent it from spreading further to the bones.
If you have pain in your joints, which are swollen due to an excess of cold humors, it is gout.
This man's leg was broken, but he needs the cushion to be placed beneath his leg as well as beneath his arms so that his hands can be kept warm.
And it is necessary for the patient's body to be treated with a hot iron cautery.
When a patient's legs are injured, it is important to consider the specific type of injury and how it relates to the location on their body.
And I have seen a fracture in the leg, which they treated with a special method.
Mota, who is typically skilled in applying medical treatments to the body. E another fracture is caused by the ancient Greeks.
And if it is necessary to put the cushion back in their place, they will remember the pain they had suffered.
And if the patient has a joint pain, we call it gout. The pain in the legs, and if there is swelling or pain in the feet, it is known as pain caused by gout, a common ailment.
Therefore, when there's no visible swelling or pain in the bones, you must apply a cushion to the area.
If your legs are swollen or have a slight crack, it's possible they are being affected by a more subtle ailment.
And if you wish to treat a case of swelling, this ailment is called sciatica by doctors when it is in the legs, but it is not actually sciatica, and it should be treated with a cushion placed on their feet.
And if the patient needs to be treated for a boil, let them stop using the word "gout" unless they are experiencing pain in their legs or feet.
And if the pain in the bone occurs more often when bloodletting is performed on the feet.
Then apply a second cushion to the patient's legs, and on their legs.
If gout occurs in the bone or foot, you must apply cautery to two parts of the body; one on the injured area.
And so if you apply cautery to the intestine, it is necessary to cauterize the opening in order to cauterize the skin.
Then carefully place a cushion under their legs to prevent further injury.
Then do you see that the patient's intestines are affected by the ailment, place a cushion on their legs to alleviate the pain.
Then stop the pain from spreading to other parts of the body by applying another cautery.
The flow of the passage is consistent with the idea that the speaker is describing how to treat the intestines in a medical context.
And for those who are small, use a cloth to collect the blood.
Then you must apply heat to the thick parts of the body, such as the legs, with a cushion, which will not be enough to cover the whole foot.
And if there is pain in the joints of the patient's leg or foot, they should be treated with a pointed cautery on their affected limbs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area where the injury is, apply the point with a heated cautery iron on the affected area. Then gently apply heat to the area of the fracture.
Then take one bandage to tie around their foot; then apply another bandage to the broken area.
Then the physician should examine the patient for other causes if there is no other cause for the pain.
Then, when using a cautery, place it on the affected area carefully so as to avoid burning healthy tissue.
And if they are made of wood, then they are wise.
Then apply a bandage to the area to cover and protect the wound.
Then you use a sharp tool to perform surgery on the patient's body, which are thick and strong.
And if you want to apply a cautery, use the cushion for a deeper incision on the foot.
Then apply cautery to the affected area, and another cushion should be placed under the patient's legs.
Then return to the patient's abdomen.
You see, if the pain in the affected limb does not subside after a few days, you'll need to take their temperature.
This sentence seems to be describing a method of applying poultices (emplaustres) for medicinal purposes in a way that mimics the language of ancient medical texts.
And for the pain in the legs, the way to apply it is the same as for the pain of the other ailments.
And if you have already opened the space between the legs, then use a small cushion on their knees; but do not apply cauterization to the foot unless it is necessary for the patient.
Then use a poultice of a specific ingredient for this purpose, as it is needed when there are other signs of injury to the body.
This describes how to treat a patient suffering from a herniated bowel or hernia.
Then apply a cushion under their feet.
And if you have to use a cushion, place it where it will be applied.
It is customary to apply this poultice to the feet for restoration, and another cushion on their legs.
Other methods for treating the ailment: apply fig tree sap and poppy seeds.
Take an altea root, crushed, and mixed with honey and water, as needed for a poultice to treat a bone fracture, apply it to the affected area. If you wish to use it on other parts of the body, then take your hand away from the affected area.
And if he is scalded, they are already called upon to treat him/her.
When treating an ailment, one should consider the nature of the affected part.
If you have already been infected by other diseases, it may be difficult to determine; but if the patient has a wound, treat the wound accordingly.
The doctors call this pain, which they describe as a result of inflammation in the joints caused by injuries, gout, just like they would if it was a broken bone or other ailments we have mentioned.
And thus begins the treatment for pain in the legs: apply a cushion to the area of pain.
If one has to deal with the pain caused by a bone that has been broken for several days, they should consider the amount of time since the injury when determining the treatment plan. Then apply pressure to the point where the pain is felt most strongly by the patient.
And so put a cushion on their leg, submerge the affected area in water for one hour, then apply a poultice to the affected area to soothe it; leave that poultice on their legs until after an hour.
And if it is a stricture, you must first treat the affected area carefully.
Then you should apply cautery to the affected area to avoid further complications.
When the joint pain is gone, they can be called gout if it has been three or more days since the injury.
E ayusta en la body's other parts, you are accustomed to apply your hands in applying the cushion.
This Latin-like sentence translates to "Yes, you should avoid placing a cushion on the fracture site" (assuming 'Mays' refers to 'Maybe' or 'Perhaps').
If you're writing about a restoration at the beginning of the body auter, do it in another place, e.g., the limb was injured, or the patient has suffered a sprain and needs to be treated with hot compresses, but also for other uses, the books are for another purpose.
For I have seen that the doctors are wrong to call it gout, but rather a pain in the foot.
Of all fractures, the second chapter discusses those that occur in the leg.
And the causes of fractures are diverse, as well as their effects.
And for the treatment of these two conditions, the patient needs to be given a hot poultice or compress on the affected areas.
This bone may be broken or fractured in one or more places; another way to say it is that the bone is called something else when it's a fracture in the leg.
A fracture is a break in the bone, which is called a fracture of the bone on their feet, or legs.
And if there's a fracture in the leg or foot, that's what you are here to treat.
Then apply a heated iron to the affected area, or to similar areas on the legs.
And if the pain is caused by these types of fractures, then apply cauterization to the separated parts. And let the patient be healed by your cushion.
And then you know, all the types of fracture are known by the doctor's examination of the injury.
And if a wound is made on the bone, the pain will be felt in the feet, but they are kept warm by another servant.
Mays in the Latin-based languages you mentioned means "in the case of" or "concerning". The sentence refers to various symptoms related to a condition, likely indicating that "mays" is a term for an ailment affecting those parts of the body.
And when you have done so, they are to be treated in such a way that the treatment for the patient will be effective.
In this case, the physician would typically call this condition gout.
If you are a man, then use a cushion on the legs to prevent gout from occurring in the thighs.
E si has been applied to the patient's body, then the pain in the legs should be treated as others are, but if the pain is on a limb, place it directly on the area of the injury.
And if the patient has a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs.
And if you want to cauterize the flesh, keep the patient's body warm, for the disease will spread.
And there are two types of operation.
And so the one way to treat them is by making an incision in the bone.
And then apply the cauterized needle to the affected area.
And therefore, it is necessary to know which parts are affected by the disease.
And if the foot is injured, it is necessary to apply heat to the area above the knee and below the skin.
And if the bone is strong and firm, you should perform the procedure on them.
This document prohibits the use of the term "circle" or "circle-like" to describe anything other than the pain caused by gout in the foot.
And it is convenient that you should use this method on those parts of the body which are affected by the cold and damp humors.
Then, to prevent further complications, you would apply cautery to the area around the broken bone.
E.g., When a wound is made on the foot for a medical procedure, the doctor would apply a cauterization technique to prevent complications.
And you should keep in mind that which one's body is being cared for by the doctor.
And so if you have gout, you must use cushions to prevent the pain from spreading.
You have already opened the area between the patient's legs, placed a cushion on their legs, and another on their chest.
And if it is necessary to open the wound on the foot so that its opening can be seen by the patient, then it should be done carefully.
Then return the intestine to its place with hot cautery, and put another cushion on the legs or joints, so they don't protrude; then you have a short-term pain that comes and goes.
And apply a hot compress to the area of the pain, treating it as gout in the legs.
When you have already found the cause of the ailment in a patient's body, and apply it to their legs, they will feel relief from the pain.
When the bone is broken, the physician can use the cushion to apply pressure to the area where the wound is located.
And then apply the razors to remove the excess blood from the body.
This is the place where the physician should apply treatment to the body, and they will use another to cauterize their legs or feet, e.g., a hot iron.
And thus, you have caused all those who are trained in this art to be amazed. And now place a cushion on their legs, for the patient's sake.
When pain occurs in your second toe, you must apply a hot cautery to the legs, as well as the feet, in order to relieve it.
And lay a cushion on your hand to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then administer these medicines to the patient, for this plague is in the legs.
And if you have applied a hot cautery to the head, the wound will be clean; but if it is the other way around, it is evil.
E therefore you must consider that the pain in the first place, e-t-on the foot's sole is treated by applying heat to the area with a cushion, and if needed, with other methods involving heat.
Then if there are no other ailments, apply that which is placed on the legs, and that which is placed on the body.
And so, when the intestine or other organs are affected by gout, les which is the disease that causes pain in the joints, and then apply heat to the feet.
On treating a broken foot.
And if one of those bones that make up the body is broken, it is a practice to call it by the name of gout.
If a member's body is injured, then apply a cushion to that area. And if you are doing surgery on the legs or thighs, it is called the "other" by the surgeon.
If a joint is fractured in the most sovereign part of the body (the head), then do so in the way that the patient's head is protected by the cushion.
Then you must use a tool to draw the parts.
And if it is possible, restore the cushion to its position on the first day of a fracture.
E put a cushion on the area where the pain is located.
And if it is necessary to make a poultice for a sickness, apply it to the afflicted part; let someone apply a poultice to the leg and place their hands on the area.
And sometimes the nose itself becomes congested, which is why a doctor should apply their hand to the patient's nose when they are treating a cold, in order that phlegm may not block the breath.
And this cause is not necessary to use a cushion; instead, you can apply heat directly if needed.
And if there should be another time a swelling on the body, apply wax to the nose or legs.
If there's a need to drain the blood from the chest, use flour and a poultice to draw it out.
When joint pain arises from cold humors, it is called gout by doctors.
Then apply heat to the nostrils, so that if the patient has a sickness in their legs, they will be relieved.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated.
Another if there is no cushion under their feet.
And so on, if the fracture is in the right leg, you place your left hand on the left side of the body.
Then apply a gentle pull to bring the jaw back into alignment.
And you have already placed a cushion so that it supports the bones, or rather on their legs, and on those bones with care for the next step.
And you should always prescribe rest for your patient.
And if you are concerned that something may be wrong with the patient's health, you should already have a plaster on their thighs for three days.
And if the body's bones are not displaced by that plaster cast, then it remains there, healing the fracture within three weeks; but if it is a plaster cast that is applied to this fracture, which is customary to call a fracture in the foot.
And then if the pain returns, treat it as we have described for other cases.
And if there are fractures in the body, you will use a cushion to treat them.
And if the patient has a straight, narrow foot, then apply the heat to their leg in proportion to the need for cauterization.
Then apply the plaster to the affected area, and if necessary, further treatment for their ailment.
Chapter 5.
This is when a cushion should be used for the cure.
The bone in a leg or foot is broken in three ways.
Then apply a cauterization to the affected limb, or use a poultice to treat the pain in the patient's foot; which will be difficult for them to experience.
And if the patient is to have the operation performed on them, two ministers must be present, one to hold the leg and the other to hold their hands and prevent them from moving the affected limb.
And then place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent further injury.
And if there is no cushion for them to sit on, you can apply a cushion under them; and apply another to the chest.
And if you cannot apply cautery to the patient's shoulder, another cushion must be placed under their arm.
And then you will apply heat to their bones, starting with the bone near the upper part of the chest, and place your hand on the patient's shoulder.
And if you are treating an injury to the feet, place a cushion on their legs.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's body, you must use the cushion because the intestine is being treated for pain.
And if you have a need to apply cautery, use a heated tool and place it on the intestine.
Mays the pain be felt in the legs, it is possible for the patient to have a diseased joint.
And if you have opened the bone to extract the plague, which is the name for the doctors' treatment of the swollen joints.
And if there is little disruption, you can use a cushion to treat them.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if necessary.
And so you will know if the patient has broken bones or other injuries.
And if the pain is in the shoulder, which is what happens with a painful condition called 'titillic', then apply it to the chest, where the patient's hands are placed.
And if there is a problem with the ligaments, then don't open them up for at least twelve days.
And apply the bandage to the patient's body, and place the other on their legs, and the last one on their feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize and comfort them, they are cauterized and comforted for 28 days, and comforted by you in 28 days.
The pain in the feet, if they are caused by an excess of cold humors, is called gout.
This is about restoring the shoulder.
The spatula is broken in the location where the patient's illness is located.
And thus when the joint is broken, one must apply a bandage to its location and provide care in accordance with the nature of the injury.
Then, apply a cushion to the area of the affected part of the body; and sometimes, you will need to put a poultice on a wound, and sometimes you may need to use a table as a surface.
If you are experiencing pain in your spatula, which could be caused by a lack of balance of humors, use a cautery to treat it.
Then place a cushion under them.
And consider the foot in its entirety, which you see has become soft, to be made strong and healed by the other, which you see has become inflamed, you must apply a cautery to the affected area, and place a cushion under the person's legs.
Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, and they will be supported.
The first spatula is used for the treatment of the lower leg, and then the spatula is used on the other parts of the body to treat them.
And then when the burning is over the body from which it is customary to call them by the name of gout.
And if you must treat them, make sure to use a hot iron on the surface of the affected area for the treatment of gout.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of foot injuries.
The foot has been treated with a cauterization tool.
Then apply another cushion to the legs and be careful not to burn them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, then place your hand on their chest and do not let them move; instead, tie the other side of the body.
Apply a poultice made of wool or linen and use a specific type of bandage for wounds on the feet.
And if the pain is in the feet, it is called a cure for the feet.
Chapter 8.
And for the restoration of the coasts when they are damaged.
Here comes the first line: And when joint pain occurs in the legs, it is customarily called arthritis on the feet.
Do as the doctor's instructions say, if they are treating a cushion of the joint pain.
And then if the pain is in the bones, apply a cushion to the area as described.
And if you are suffering from pain in the legs, they will be called gout by its use of the word "legs".
Gout causes swelling in the legs.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body, there will be pain in the legs, and the pain will be severe.
And they apply leeches to the patient's limbs to treat their swelling.
Then place your hand on the patient's body to prevent them from being inflamed with pain.
And if you have to use a hot iron to burn them out, so that the pain might be relieved by cauterizing.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area so that the plague can be treated.
And if the intestine is inflamed, then apply a hot poultice to the area.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the injured part, apply it to their leg(s) once they are healed.
This is the ninth chapter.
This refers to a surgical procedure for treating a wound or hernia in the spine.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the limbs, it should be applied to the legs and spine. E if you are experiencing pain in your joints, it is advisable to use a cushion on the legs or chest of the patient.
And if you are treating the pain in the foot, the pain should be treated as gout.
And if you want to know if they are suffering from a disease called spondils (a type of gout).
This translates to:
And if it's not due to any of those causes, then the cause is less likely to be the cause of their pain.
And if the intestine or cushion should be applied to the area where the pain is felt in the legs, then it is called gout.
And if you need to apply a poultice, use one of the comforting and stimulating kind; apply it to the affected area, and place a cushion on their legs for warmth.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's foot due to an injury, it should be covered with a bandage.
If you need to set bones or use cauteries on the limbs, you should do so carefully.
And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a poultice to it and cauterize the spot where you feel the pain.
Chapter 10
Then apply the treatment for gout.
And if the joints are affected by cold pain that causes inflammation, then apply a poultice to the area where the pain is, and place a bandage over the area.
Then you are placing your hand on the patient's body over the fracture to hold the patient's hands.
When it comes to the patient's legs, if you need to cauterize, it must be returned to its natural position after being treated with a cushion.
Then place a cushion on their chest to ease the pain. E then apply a hot cautery to the patient's legs or other parts.
The patient's condition is called gout.
From the provided context, the text appears to be describing medical procedures or treatments.  The first guess for the sentence in question is:
Then treat the feet as they are painful.
The following are three possible translations of "Capitol .xi." into English:
This is where you would normally place your hand on the patient's legs and apply a cushion to their leg or thigh, to help with the healing process of a fracture.
When the surgeon has completed his work on the shoulder, he will then apply a cushion to the shoulder.
Then you restore the joint to its usual place.
Two extremities should be placed on their hands to prevent them from moving.
And if it is an open wound, the patient's leg should be treated with a different type of cautery.
And if there is a need to adjust the patient's treatment for severe pain, they should be treated in accordance with their condition.
And if there's another ailment, and place a cushion on their leg, you must apply this one to the body part where they have the other ailment, applying to the wound or the affected area, but not to the foot.
And if you want to make sure the patient has no humors in their legs or feet, apply leeches to their foot.
So if the muscle is injured, treat it with cauterization to prevent the injury from worsening.
Then if the wound is near the foot, another bandage should be placed on that spot.
Then apply a poultice on their joints.
Mays, if needed, you should apply a poultice to the affected area and keep the patient's blood humors flowing freely, and use a hot needle to treat their ailment.
A cushion should be applied to the foot for relief and a bandage on the wound.
And then you should cover the wound on the patient's legs or arms, so they don't move to cause further pain.
Perhaps you've used a hot poultice for pain relief?
And you place a cushion on their legs so that they don't move it too much, because if it is moved too much, it will cause pain to the patient's body.
And then place a strength on their legs, and then put another on the hands, which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And then you have put in place the cushion for your feet. And when it is necessary for the patient to experience pain, they are going to be burned by a cautery.
And so if you see a pain in the legs as well as a place for the patient's feet, then treat them accordingly.
Then apply a cushion to the legs, as described, if you think a cautery will be needed for the patient's condition.
And you should consider the patient's leg in all its parts for three days, so that the pain may not worsen.
Mays three days should pass before you release the cushion.
The patient should be treated in a relaxed state to ensure their stomach and bowels are comfortable.
And the cushion will keep the intestine from being inflamed.
Then place a cushion on their legs, so you can gently hold the patient's feet.
The first line means: "If the patient has pain in their foot for more than 40 days"
And if the fracture is severe, it will take two months to heal.
The other cushions are for the legs or the feet.
Then apply a bandage or sling to the arm.
The patient's legs are to be covered in cushions.
And so the patient's pain is treated by the use of cautery on their legs or feet.
The doctors will say it is a mild case if they are able to fix it back together easily.
And when the fire is broken, that is, the bone is fractured in the case of gout.
And two bones are being broken in the legs.
Therefore, if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs or feet, a cushion should be placed under the patient’s legs when performing surgery.
When the fire is hot, you must apply a cauterizer to treat it with more force.
And if the two focals are together, then you must cauterize them.
And if you are going to use cautery on a patient, apply it to the affected area, which is usually in the leg, and place a cushion under them for support.
And for the rest of the treatment, let the other cushions be placed in front of them, as needed, in order to treat their ailment.
And another has placed a cushion on their chest, so as to provide support for them.
And place the bones back in their original positions as best as possible.
And if your body's shape is out of place, use other methods to help put the pain in its proper place.
And if you hope to heal the patient through cauterization, apply the treatment we previously mentioned, using a hot iron on their legs and a cold treatment elsewhere on the body.
So if there is a wound on their legs you should apply a bandage to the injured area.
The patient's condition is such that they are likely to have gout at the beginning.
And you will know that the patient has been healed by the stars, as it were, when they are well-disposed, or in good condition.
Et si el dolor tornava a sorgir in las parts baixes del cors, pausa una mica la cushion on their knees.
And when the bandages are applied to the patient's limbs, they should be soft and smooth, not rough or harsh.
And consider the leg and the foot as one. And if you apply a cautery to the body, it is necessary to use a hot cautery when it's needed for a wound.
And let the cushion be placed on their legs.
Translation: Then, even if the patient’s pain is alleviated by the use of a cauterizing tool on the legs, the physician should still be cautious.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area for a few days to treat it.
Mays (If) the pain is caused by something other than gout, it is customary to apply it to their legs or thighs.
And put another cushion under them to help them sleep in peace.
And if you know that the intestine will be healed or not in a few days, it is important to do so as carefully as possible.
The text shall be written down later in a more complete form.
And if the patient has pain in their limbs, then use a cushion to support the legs.
Know that the pain caused by the gouty inflammation is in the joints of the foot.
And if a patient has gout, they should have their pain treated by placing a cushion under them on their legs.
And then the doctor applies the cushion to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice and bandages to the affected area; if necessary, use a cushion and wrap it with linen.
When the wound is deep, cover it with cloth to protect the patient's legs; otherwise, cauterize the wound.
And if you are making points on the body, then it is necessary to make them in the right place; for example, on the legs or the hand should be used, and let the patient's foot be covered with a cushion.
Then if the injury is outside, apply cauterization to the affected area, like applying it to the injured leg.
And if the bone is broken in the toe, apply a cushion to the foot and then elevate it to avoid further injury.
When other fractures are made in the body or on their fingers, it is called gout.
E consider the following for your treatment: e to prevent complications — am coveys a cushion under their legs, but they are not to be used in case of a problem.
The physician may use various methods to treat the patient, but they must be careful to avoid excessive bleeding.
For the restoration of a broken bone in the leg.
The bones are broken by the cold in the other parts of the body.
The patient's condition is so severe that they are experiencing pain in their feet, which doctors call a "lively" version of gout.
And then apply a splint to the broken bone, so as to hold it in place.
When the doctors see that the other parts of the body are affected by the disease, they call it gout.
Aprop es que la dolor no ye en el otro lugar.
And then the physician should apply a cushion to the affected area and treat the patient accordingly. Mays the swelling subside, then treat the wound on your patient's foot.
Then apply a bandage to secure the patient's leg; and place a cushion on their chest.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And when one has opened the space between the bones (of the leg), one must carefully place a cushion there.
And if it is necessary to apply a cauterized tool to the affected area, and that's what you should do.
Then the patient's bowels were opened and cleansed by means of liaments (ligatures) applied to their legs and another on their feet.
Then place two cushions on the legs of the patient so that one cushion supports each foot.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area to treat the infected body part.
Then you shall cauterize the leg bones, which are the ones that will be affected by the inflammation.
And another use another cushion on their legs, and one more to hold them together.
>But in that manner you restore it, if they are restored, only then can you call them a cushion or other remedies for gout.
And if he has been ill for more than forty days, or less, it is necessary to consider the nature of his illness.
Chapter 15.
This refers to restoring something to its proper place.
This is the first part of your problem, which translates to:
Then apply cauterization to the leg, but only if the patient has a fracture or injury in the affected area, for which you are using the other cushions for.
And then the patient's intestines are to be brought back together, but only if it's necessary because of the pain they caused.
And thus he must apply a poultice and use it to treat the affected joint.
Then they are considered to be the cause of pain in the legs, which you can see are covered with cushions, as needed for those who have been injured by a blow.
This is a Latin text, so I'll provide the English translation as it relates to the meaning of the provided Latin-like translations:
And treat the patient's leg with a cushion.
The first part of the text translates to:
And if you are treating one of the species of the body's two parts, then it is customary to treat them with one hand on their arm.
And if one or more members are present in the patient's body, they are to be treated with cautery on the affected limb.
And if the patient's leg or foot bones are affected, those are the most common areas for pain to be felt.
And if it is bone pain, it is customary to call it gout.
And then place cushions on each leg to prevent them from becoming further inflamed.
But if the leg has been wounded, it is better to be treated by a doctor.
When the body is in pain, one must apply the cushion to the foot.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, apply cushions on both sides.
And place a cushion under each foot to prevent the intestine from being affected by the cold.
Then place a cushion under them, as needed to support the leg.
And physicians often call a fracture a disease that affects the legs, but also sometimes use the term for other ailments.
Then cauterize the patient's affected area, if necessary to stop the spreading of gout (a cushion of inflammation) then you must apply the cautery.
When the pain of gout affects the joints of the limbs, it is called "podagra" by doctors.
And then placed a cushion on their legs.
Then there are no longer to be found fractures in the foot.
Then you have already prepared the body for the operation.
Then place a cushion on the elevated leg and apply pressure to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area and hold their legs open.
Then place a cushion on them, and keep their legs wrapped up.
And if it lasts three or four days, then you will use cauterization on them.
This is a common area for pain to reside, but the intestine must be kept in its place. And then place your hand on the affected area to prevent gout.
This is a difficult task as you've provided only a single, fragmented sentence. It seems like there might be some typos in the text.
And so that the patient does not forget to be cautious about the causes which lead to this condition when they occur in others.
Capitol XVIII.
This treatment for wounds on the feet is best done by someone skilled.
When a woman's bowels are inflamed, it is known as a female-specific condition.
And thus the midwife will put her hand on the woman's knee to check if she is experiencing pain.
And then place a cushion on the patient's body and let them urinate freely.
And so for seven days or thereabouts, they would apply it to the patient's legs.
And if you're treating them, use a canula to drain the excess fluid from the wound; then apply a cushion to the area.
When it heals, it's already been treated as it should be.
And if a bone is broken in the leg, you should use a hot cautery to treat it.
And es una coyssi (it means "and a thing") et the body's humors are not hidden in these fractures, but rather these fractures are usually caused by an imbalance of the humors near the bone.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, et cetera.
Chapter .xix.
Then let your hand be placed on their leg.
The first line translates to: **It is convenient for a patient who has already been diagnosed with a fracture in their foot**.
Then if the patient has a cushion to protect them from the plague, they should be treated as for the other types of humors.
And if it's necessary to open the wound on their leg, let it drain and form a poultice.
When there are boils on the thighs, let them be treated by applying a hot cautery to the area between the third and fourth days, but wait until the seventh day to drain them.
Mayst thou apply a cushion to their legs.
Mays es the patient for whom you are making the points; a member of the medical profession must hold the joint in place.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, this is how they should be treated:  "The patient must have a cushion placed under their hands."
Apply heat to the affected areas; for other cases, use another tool specifically designed for that purpose.
Then, carefully place the cushion under their legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then you would cauterize the other one.
And if the patient's legs are elevated above their body, the pain will be felt in the limbs and chest.
And then you can apply your hands to their legs for healing.
Then cover the broken leg area so that the wound doesn't become inflamed.
When it is difficult for you to reduce the swelling in the patient's foot, then use a cushion on their legs to support them.
And then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located?
And if the bone is returned to its natural position, it will be painful for the patient.
And if you are treating someone for gout, make sure to apply a cushion soaked in vinegar or something similar to the affected area.
And if you need to apply the cautery, leave the bandages on the legs open.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area to protect the patient from the plague (which is what causes gout to be so painful). And if you have to apply cauterization, make sure to use a different technique for the legs.
Then use a hard cloth to press against the affected area in order to prevent further injury.
When a doctor sees an inflammation or pain in the body's parts, that he treats to restore the condition of the body to its natural state.
Therefore, apply a poultice to the affected area.
You've already tried to treat the plague, but now you have to apply it again to the patient's arms and another person has to be present to hold the patient's hands. And if you have to remove something from the body that has been caused by humor, you should apply a hot compress to the affected area.
When a doctor has to make a decision, their judgment is based on experience and knowledge.
And so you can treat the pain with a hot compress to open the pores of the skin on the foot.
"Then, apply cautery to the affected area."
The treatment of wounds in case of a fracture.
This phrase describes using their hands to treat the patient's ailment by placing them on the legs or other affected areas.
and apply poultices to the affected area or use cautery if it is recent pain that affects the joints, and apply a cushion on the new growth to soothe the pain of the recent growth and apply a cushion
E aprouve the pain of a lead poultice applied to the legs; a pain that is often experienced in gout.
Mays is the name used by doctors for those whose intestines are inflamed.
Chapter .xxi.
Then restore the bones to their proper place in the leg, and then put them back in.
And if there are many causes for the pain in the chest, they have to be treated carefully, because the problem may be caused by various factors.
This line should be translated as:
Then apply a poultice to the affected area so it doesn't spread further.
Another translation for "Capitol .xxii." is "Chapter 22".
And when bones are broken, treat them surgically and another cushion on their chest, so that the pain may be prevented from spreading.
If a doctor has allowed the patient to have their broken bone treated, make sure that the bone is not broken in a way that would prevent it from being healed by a cautery.
This is a very difficult task as I need more context to accurately translate. The phrase "Mays ja so statz" suggests "in our time" or "today", but without knowing what "motz" refers to in the context of this treatise, I cannot provide a complete translation.
And there are many remedies for recent foot pain, such as gouty pains that are treated by the application of poultice made from herbs.
And so if there are no other remedies for the pain in the legs that are available.
And if the person has been diagnosed with a cautery wound, you should apply a poultice to it, while a cushion is placed on their thighs and the patient is given something to soothe the pain.
The body is being treated for gout by applying a cushion to the legs and using another method to hold the patient's hands.
This is Latin for "on speech and dislocation".
Dislocation in the legs can be painful and cause large, debilitating injuries.
So when there is a dislocation, the other two are for cushioning the affected area, while the third one is used to reduce the dislocation.
And for that reason, you should apply a cushion to the legs, so they don't open up on them, and do the same to the body, with another cushion under their chest.
When the bloodletting is done on the foot, it's covered by a poultice.
And place a cushion on their legs, and for them to be treated by other means.
E si est'e que se per yeu to make an incision in the foot, you must first reduce the dislocation according to the method used by physicians.
And then apply the cushion to the affected body part.
Apply a cushion to the jaw while applying treatment.
E' una forma de gota.
When the pain is less severe, gout is less likely to be the cause.
If a dislocation is complete, then it is necessary to apply a reduction to the joint.
And then cauterize the dislocated joint with the doctor applying pressure to keep the patient still.
When the pain is severe, warm compresses and water will be applied to their legs and hands, then apply another poultice of the same.
And so, when you need to treat the pain in their foot, use a cushion for that purpose.
And if he suffers from pain in his legs, he will have to be treated by someone who can handle the pain.
And if you are administering to the sick, they are already in need of a cure.
And if it is difficult to keep two mandibles in place for some time, lehoras you will cause anger and pain in the patient's feet, and other remedies are needed.
And when you have opened the body (for healing) it is important to use appropriate methods for closing the incision.
Chapter 25.
And now place your hand on their shoulder to help the patient's body be protected from injury.
The fork in the road is not always a sign of a choice to be made; sometimes it is just a place where the roads continue onward.
And if the patient's foot is swollen, then they should be treated by a doctor. And thus the patient will be treated for their illness.
And then apply that cushion to their legs, and hold them in place.
May the sickness be with you, may your hands be upon them.
And if you are a doctor, command the patient to be still and rest.
And then that servant will be returned to its natural position.
E aprop (This phrase translates to "and then" or "and in turn," which would make sense when combined with the translation of the following sentences.)
On the reduction of a muscle dislocation.
Know that it is by the action of the gouty humors that the other meaning of the word "gout" applies to the condition of the foot known as "gouts".
And the second is that it be dislocated by the back; and the second be it placed under their hands, another cushion behind them, and another on the other side, so that it may be set right.
And in many cases, gout causes pain en la parte of the body, where there are few muscles, it is difficult to treat.
Some men experience pain when they have gout, which is treated with cautery.
Then you have already cured the other ailment, but there are others.
Then treat it as a dislocated joint, you should place your hand on their foot to prevent them from moving.
Then apply cold compresses to the affected area, and avoid contact with the skin.
And from this dislocation, make a small reduction if it's a fresh dislocation and the patient is young.
And the minister carefully tends to the cushion's althoug the patient's legs, he/she gently elevates their leg and places a cushion on their knee to rest upon.
Perhaps if the pain is in their legs, it's best to use a cushion for the patient.
Then you will apply wool bandages to the wounds of the legs and feet.
Then place a cushion under the bed of the patient's foot, to prevent the pain from spreading. Mays if leavings are light, they may be used to apply pressure on their legs.
And so the patient should be laid down;  the cushion placed under their body, and a pillow upon his chest to protect the skin, but the other methods are too painful for him.
And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling by making incisions, they should use cautery on their legs.
Then apply a cloth to the wound on the legs, to prevent them from becoming infected.
Then apply the treatment to the affected area, leaving the cushion for the patient's legs and another to their foot, ensuring the patient feels comfortable.
And if you need to apply cauterization, do so with a cushion placed on their scale, for example, the other leg is extended to be treated.
And when the filling is placed on the patient's legs, apply the poultice for seven days, but if it is not cured by then, use another method to treat the disease.
And if the patient's illness is mild, they are already comforted by the treatment.
Then use a cushion to support the patient's food while another person supports their legs and the physician attends to them.
See Translation 2.
And if at the end of seven days, if the pain persists, it is treated as other ailments are.
The meaning of the text is ambiguous, but it likely refers to treating a dislocated joint or body part using a cautery tool.
And if that other pain in the intestine needs to be cured, apply a bandage on the area after cauterization.
And when the illness has subsided, allow the patient to move freely again.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
This refers to setting a bone or joint back in place after it has been dislocated.
And another way to say this is that the joint of the body allowing movement is dislocated, and you are able to return it by manipulating the bone structure around it.
Then call upon the other servant to apply heat to their bowels as a poultice.
This is a recipe for making poultices for gout, which was a common ailment in medieval times.
And if the pain is in the legs, then the patient has another word for it.
And if it doesn't reduce, you should use strong force to pull it back.
And they have two ministers to their body.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the arm or leg, apply a bandage to their limbs.
And when the physician applies force to the joint with his hand, he will help those things which cause a loosening of the tension on the joint to be put back in;  and he placed a cushion under the patient’s legs.
Then apply what you can to relieve the pain in the patient's legs and feet, which are swollen from gout.
You have already placed a cushion under them, so if there are no other signs of illness in the patient's legs, they must be treated with a cautery.
This refers to the process of applying a cushion and possibly bandages to a person's legs and thighs, which I believe is an old-fashioned way of saying: "When dealing with a painful joint, such as in the case of gout, you should apply a poultice and keep it from being disturbed for several days."
And if you need to treat a patient for the disease, the first step is to apply a poultice. And another [person] we place a cushion under them, and then apply another to their legs. Then place your hand on their arm, for when they are in pain, it is already the way to apply a cautery.
And if you want to stop a patient's intestine from protruding, you should use a cushion on their legs, which will prevent them from feeling pain in their feet.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
Another cure for those suffering from dislocation.
When the foot has been injured, it is customary to place cushions on it.
And if you are a doctor, and there is a need to reduce a dislocation in the leg, that is to say, that he puts the bones back into place, so that the other cushions do not have to be used.
When first aid is needed for the foot, the doctor should apply a cushion to the affected area to prevent further injury.
And so it is good if you have already treated them for their ailment; otherwise, let it be, because they are already being treated by others.
And then the other parts of the body were to be treated; in particular, the injured leg needs treatment.
And if they are experiencing illness, apply a cushion to their feet for 5 days.
Then apply heat to relieve the pain, and gently massage the affected area.
In the first chapter of the medical treatise, we learn that the condition known as "gutta" was often referred to as "gout" by physicians.
And so, concerning the treatment of dislocations of the fingers, it is thus done.
And sometimes the bloodletting is done on the legs.
Then apply a poultice to the affected part.
And then place your hand on their head to prevent them from swelling.
And then he placed a cushion under his knees.
And when it's necessary to give someone a hot bath, the person should have a towel nearby.
And so, if the patient has a dislocated body part, apply it to their chest and hold it there, keeping it in place.
And if it is customary to call it gout when it happens in other parts of the body.
Here is the translation of the given text:
From the other's perspective, this sentence refers to treating a person for a condition affecting their spine (specifically, a dislocation).
Then if you can't find a cure in your knowledge, then use a hot iron to treat the patient's body and another to apply heat to the affected area.
And the other four legs are also affected by the swelling, which affects the patient's will.
Therefore, it is known as "the cold has seized" the ailment.
Gout is when the body's humors are cold and cause pain in the joints, especially in the feet.
Mays in the past, doctors have found many ways to treat it, but they are long gone.
Then the pain in the feet is due to a cold humor, and those who are suffering from it should be treated with cautery applied to the affected area.
And then use your hands to hold the patient steady.
And if a doctor applies cautery to the foot, they should place a cushion on which to rest their hand near the head of the patient, where the other is located at the joint.
Then the minister will burn the leg and put a cushion on their legs; the other leg will be operated on by a second doctor, while the patient's body is heated by the first.
And so it is on the head that the cushion should be placed under the patient's body, and their legs should be kept from being affected by gout in the other ways.
And if you are suffering from gout, apply the cauterizer to the affected area.
And the doctor, having adjusted the patient's legs, then sits by their side while holding them still.
And if the body does not have that much space, it is called an improper form of the ailment. And so the patient's pain in the table is caused by something else, a cushion to protect the skin on the leg.
And if you want to heal them, apply a hot poultice to the affected area, and use two cushions for their cushion.
When the patient's body is affected by pain in the legs or feet, it is called podagra.
And in the extremitat are three lengths of the same length.
Then place a cushion on the patient's body to be treated with the cautery tool that is used for such purposes.
And so you must apply the treatment for gout to their legs, as well as use other methods.
Then apply a poultice of flaxseed to the affected area.
And if you want to heal from a delicate ailment, use a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
If the pain persists despite the treatment, apply remedies to the affected area for a prolonged period, as long as it takes to heal; leeches can be used for this purpose, applying them to the location of the ailment.
When a joint has been treated for dislocation, and the pain persists, be careful when using this medicine, as it may cause death in the patient.
The patient's legs are being cauterized.
And then if there are humors in the joint, a doctor would treat it as a dislocation.
Laoranza’s, which is only possible with the use of a cautery on those parts, are called laoranza by doctors.
Then apply the proper placement of your hands on the body can be applied to four areas.
And if the foot is swollen, apply a poultice to the major joints, and if the pain is in the limbs, treat them as one would treat the larger joints.
And if a bone in the leg of the patient has been dislocated by the pain, you should set the limb back into place, and then put a cushion under it, so that the affected area will be supported.
And if the first sign appears, that's when you should apply the cushion to the patient's body, and the other treatment for the other ailments.
When joint pain arises in the body, and pain arises in the foot, which was not caused by the above-mentioned ailments but rather by something else, then they should be treated as if the patient had gout.
The pain in their limbs is caused by the body's bad humors, and they should be treated with a cautery applied to the leg and a cushion placed under the patient's leg to prevent swelling, and if the patient has any pain in the area of the knee, it will be known as a symptom of the dislocated part.
May's reduccio be that which you consider.
Mays in that case, you should apply cautery to the affected area and keep it covered for recent dislocatio or other injuries.
And if you need to apply heat to the affected area, it's best to use another cushion on the abdomen; a skilled healer will know where to place it.
And let there be applied to the patient's legs or feet a cushion behind them, and another in front of them.
And he should place his hand on the patient's body, which would be hanging to let the blood flow freely through the body.
And this kind of pain affects all four limbs.
And if the dislocation returns to the place we have indicated, it is necessary for them to be burned.
When pain is applied to the thigh, they should be given a cushion for le comfort.
And if it is necessary to place another cushion on their chest, the first thing to do is return the intestine to its place, and then you can put a cushion on it.
And if you have already opened the body part to be healed, then that type of pain is called gout.
When gout occurs in the toes, it is treated by cauterization, apply a strong bandage to the affected area.
And let it be known that there are four humors.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient, it should be done on their legs, and two assistants are needed.
And so you should use a young man to place a cushion under the patient's feet, because the intestine will be relieved.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area, as instructed by the doctor.
Then one must have two parts of the body to be treated: the one who is ill and the one who is being cauterized.
The other name for the doctor's cure for gout is called "other" in English.
And if the dislocation is in the leg, use the right hand to apply a cushion on his other leg.
E si la malatia es de natura de l’eyssament, e se causen per causa dura:
When joint pain occurs in the body, it is customary to apply a compress to the affected area.
And when the pain is in the feet — if the patient has a cushion under them, apply heat to the area until the affected areas are healed.
And compare the leg to the other leg.
And when the body has been infiltrated by something that causes pain, then you should let it be left to fester, it says.
And so you see, if there is any cause for swelling, apply your cushion to the affected area for three days.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their legs, the patient should be treated for a few days until they are healed.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body that lead to pain in the joints, particularly in the feet.
And then treat the dislocation.
The patient suffers from a condition that causes pain in their feet, which doctors call "gout".
The patient's foot has been dislocated, but they are able to be moved and repositioned.
Then to treat it with two poultices: one on the body and one on the chest.
When your leg is exposed to cold, apply heat to the affected area and place your hand on it to prevent further pain.
And apply a bandage to the patient's affected area for three or four days.
E'n lacus
If a pain in the limbs arises from the use of cold cauteries, it is called a “cold” by doctors.
Another option for translating the text could be: "And if you want to apply a treatment to the affected area of the body (if necessary), and if the patient's condition requires cauterization, then perform it with a pointed cautery."
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Then apply another poultice to the area where the joint pain occurs, but only after the patient has been put on the couch or bed.
And that which is called a cauterization is when the physician cauterizes the affected area.
The patient should be treated with cauterization if they have mild gout.
The translation for the text you provided is likely: "But in the treatment of the patient who has been dislocated by another (a cushion being placed on their legs) while a doctor attends to them."
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the big toe, you must do so on their right side, while holding their left hand.
Then apply your hand to their legs, and let it be applied to the body in two places, the right one being the area of the pain.
And if a vein or artery is treated as described above.
And if it is necessary to make cushions on the leg, you should do it with a cushion.
And then, if you return to it in two days, that will be enough.
Mays si a tu be careful to cover the wound if you have to make incisions on the legs of the patient.
Then place your hand on the patient's legs, and if the pain arises from the body's humors, which are causing illness in the area where the bloodletting should be done, you should hold a cloth over the area.
And if the patient's leg is opened up, then the cushion is placed under their foot.
Then apply the bandage to the affected limb, so that the pain in the feet doesn't spread.
And if you have a strong desire for something, and your stomach hurts, the doctors say it is called gout.
Then leave it alone for two days if the pain is caused by cold humors.
And then place a cushion under their legs to support them. This describes someone who has been diagnosed with gout.
And if they are affected by an abscess, then it should be treated with a poultice, but only after the inflammation has subsided, because the heat will make the pain worse.
Chapter xxxiv.
This treatment will show you how to fix a dislocation in your finger.
When a person's leg is injured, treat it with other cushions on their legs and feet.
And if you are a doctor, treat the patient's pain by opening the wound with a needle to drain it.
Then place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent the inflammation from spreading.
And if the patient has been cauterized, let them rest for three days.
This sentence appears to be from a text in a language resembling French or Italian, which is likely the context for your ".xxxv." prompt.
Some joints are dislocated and others are affected by plague.
When the cold humors are on the legs of the patient, death will be the result.
A good physician will know by the symptoms of the illness if they are dealing with a true case of gout. Then apply the cushion to their legs and feet.
The patient should have a hot compress applied to the affected area if they have a cold humors.
And if there is dislocation or fracture in the bones, then you have to treat them with the remedies we use for gout.
Then place your hand on the patient's legs and foot to prevent the pain from spreading. Ayssi fine, the patient's condition is such that a physician should be called. Amen.
