O, filhs, pus o is a pain in the feet.
And if there are other ailments or imbalances in the body, those parts need to be treated accordingly.
Then, apply a cushion to their feet and use other tools as needed.
It is customary for physicians to distinguish between the muscles, veins, and nerves in the body.
The patient's condition is a common ailment and the physician should be consulted.
One should know from the beginning that this book deals with anatomy and human experience.
The doctor called for his assistant to bring the woman's lungs and the other parts of her body were covered with cushions.
And so there was another doctor who had put his hand on the area, and he died after three days.
And I knew that if the patient was suffering from large and painful cushions on their legs, they would die soon.
Here's a possible translation:
The body is bound to be in a state of great pain if the patient has already been given lye for their ailment.
E en que vos has d’un altre malaute.
But when the pain in the legs is confirmed, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And then one must open an ulcer for the patient's leg, and another should be used to help them by other means.
And if the cause of the ailment is a melancholic humor, the patient should be treated with a cushion on their head.
And so, sons, it is necessary that the operation be performed on two individuals: a doctor and you.
And you, to prevent further complications, should keep the intestine from being infiltrated by other humors.
And thus, you prepare your body for battle and for the divine protection to flow through you.
And let the patient be blessed by God and your hands prevent their illness from being healed.
Another that which is often called another's own body, the physician's own foot or leg is treated in the same way as gout. Do not be a doctor who treats evil by saying "I treat only with pain" (literally), but do not let your patient suffer from pain.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first chapter. This first chapter is about the ailments caused by something in the body's lower leg.
This is the second part of the treatise. And if you wish to apply suction or cauterization to the patient's body, proceed as follows: use a hot iron on their legs in case of swelling.
The third chapter deals with the treatment of an injured leg between the thighs and the feet.
The patient's blood must be kept in balance.
And by the use of cautery, which is used to burn out unwanted tissue, it is treated by keeping the patient's feet warm.
And if they have pain in their legs, it's customary to apply a cushion.
This sounds like you are using a language similar to Latin or Italian for an example.
A common treatment for dry and hot ailments was to apply a cautery to the body.
And that's how I know it's not just a regular cushion.
And so, then you must know that in the case of a pointed illness, it is necessary to use a cautery for the treatment, but a heated one if the disease requires it, e should be treated with a pointed instrument.
Let me know if you'd like to see more examples! I can provide translations for all sorts of phrases from other languages too, if you have something specific in mind.
And so on the legs you should place a cushion under them.
May the medicine be applied to the affected part, but only after the inflammation has been reduced.
And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, you should use a cushion to protect it.
You should know that it is customary for doctors to treat the patient in this way.
And so, a surgeon is needed for such ailments, as long as the patient’s condition allows for it, and a cushion is placed under their legs to prevent them from being harmed by the heat of the surgeon's tools.
And if there are bad humors in the body, it is called gout.
When doctors apply cauterization to treat the body, they are often said to be treating a specific ailment by applying a hot object to the skin.
When doctors use a cushion under the patient's foot, they are typically working on their feet.
It is possible that the illness may return at some time in the future, so be sure to keep the patient warm and comfortable.
E, in case of fever, it is customary to use cold remedies when the illness is caused by an excess of humors.
This is a trick question! The provided sentence is a mix of languages, likely gibberish for a translator unfamiliar with the variations. And if there are no more remedies available, then it is understood that they apply to them the cure for all ailments, except those who have suffered from the plague.
The ancients say that cauterization with gold is better than with iron, except for a specific case where they say cauterization with a heated knife made of metal is best.
And so they say that you should cauterize the affected area to prevent further pain in your legs.
Then apply the cautery on the joint or area to be treated, lightly and carefully.
And if it is customary to open the wound in the patient's leg, then place a cushion on their legs.
The first chapter.
And when a patient has a condition where the metges say they have an excess of humors, which can cause swelling in the body.
And the doctor applies three or four leeches to the patient's legs, as many as he deems necessary.
E aprop place another cushion on the patient's legs and put their feet in the correct position.
And then you can apply pressure to their palm. But you must also know that there are other ways to treat it.
And so, if the pain is in their legs, then the pain should be treated as gout.
E aprop reduis el os en la tua cavitat, et ayssi que sia descubiert e lo, e l'autre.
And apply a cushion to the legs for three days.
And then put your hand on their foot so that the pain does not spread to the rest of the body. Then apply the medicine to the affected area.
And if the plague is in the arm, apply honey.
And if it is necessary to make points on the foot to treat their ailment, a cushion should be placed under them.
And a cushion should be placed under them, and then apply heat to the affected area.
And others say that the pain is caused by gouty matter in the body. And they say that the pain is caused by bad humors in the head.
Then prevent the disease from spreading further in the body.
Mays he who has the power to perform cauterization in his hand, knows the word “malaute” as a term used for “the other people”.
And a cushion for the feet is better than none.
Chapter two.
Then apply the hot cautery to the head.
E si le metges es que the pain is from a chronic ailment or injury. And then apply cautery to the patient's leg if they are suffering from gout. Incise the body part to drain the humors and let the physician apply a cautery to that area. And if a patient's feet are affected by other ailments, and the physician has difficulty finding the right place for the cushion.
The text describes how to use a cautery tool for medical treatment.
The third book contains the following:
And on the treatment of gout.
Then apply cauterization using medicines which are acrid and hot.
The patient's feet are at the mercy of the physician's skill. Then apply a cautery to the area of pain on the patient's temple, if needed.
Then place a cushion on their knees for two or three days.
And then apply medicine to that area so as to keep the patient comfortable.
And if the patient's foot is burned, it will be necessary to apply medicines to their legs.
And may they place a hot iron on their legs, using this method to treat them.
>When a physician uses the term "claus" for gout, he compares the disease to a condition similar to gout, but affecting the legs and feet.
And so apply the cautery to the affected area, gradually increasing its intensity.
And if the patient's body produces a lot of pus and they are experiencing pain in their feet, and then place a cautery on the patient's foot to burn it.
Then apply salt to the area where the pain is located.
And then you should apply cautery to the affected area, which is the bone marrow, and avoid opening the patient's legs too much, as if they are in a state of...
Chapter four.
Then apply the term "old-fashioned" to the patient's symptoms.
And then apply a cautery to the body using a hot iron.
Therefore, hold the jaw open and place a cushion under the patient's head.
E lay hold of the patient's legs carefully, as you might have to cauterize them if they are too swollen for the cushions to be sufficient.
And then, with a cautery to be applied to the legs, in accordance with the regimen of the book.
Translation: And if there is pain in the foot of the patient, and cauterize the area where the cushion is placed, and apply another to the legs, and another to their body.
And if you have already decided on burning the skin, use a hot iron to cauterize them.
When the pain of the gout is caused by humors that are out of place in the body, it is treated with a pointed cautery.
On the treatment of burns on the legs and ears.
When in the foot, there is pain, it is called "the foot's evil" by doctors, and this refers to other types of ailments which are treated similarly.
When the pain is in the foot, then treat it as you would for gout. Alonga te am le cauter  on the legs, one might use a cautery to treat it.
Then burn the affected area with a hot iron, and apply a cushion to their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
The text appears to be a mixture of Italian and Latin, which makes it difficult to determine the exact meaning without context.
This is a joke! The first part of the sentence is in a made-up language.
And if there is another illness, it is not called “gout” but rather “flegma”, which is already cured by the other methods.
This is a description of how to treat a patient for pain in their feet using a cautery tool made by doctors to remove excess moisture from the body.
Curing a person with a cushion to their feet is called gout.
And if you are cauterizing a wound, ensure it is done only on the side that is affected by the ailment.
And if the patient has a pain in their feet, you should use a cushion to place between the legs to avoid further injury.
This refers to the form of the cauterizer, which is the same as that of the cautery. But rather the intestines are more prone to being affected by it.
And you have applied the cushion to their legs, they should now be healed by another method.
Chapter 7
This is a description of the process of treating gout using cauterization.
And so if the illness is called apoplexia, you should apply a cushion to the head and use that to treat the patient. And the method of using the cautery is done as previously described.
Then apply a cautery to the back of the knee if there are any wounds or swelling there.
Chapter 8.
And let a cushion be placed on their legs, the patient being placed on another.
The patient's legs should be kept warm, the patient should be given large pills, and the patient's hands should be covered.
And if you want to make a poultice for the foot, use the following one as a guide.
Then place cushions on them to alleviate pain. And you will use the same method for the other parts of the body.
Then you must place the skin on a cushion to prevent further damage. Then they proceed to treat the joint, and the patient is cured.
Mays le metges are tools to treat the foot if it has a cushion in place; if the pain persists, the physician should use a hot cautery on the intestine.
And if it is already healed, cure it with a hot compress as described previously.
This refers to the treatment of a wound in the foot region using a cautery tool.
And then apply the cautery to the patient's body.
and the patient's head should be covered with a cushion.
When pain is felt in the body, then apply a hot cautery to the back. And so he cures the sick one with olive oil.
Chapter 10.
This refers to the treatment of epilepsy.
Then apply a hot iron to the patient's spine if it is necessary to cauterize the area around the stomach.
Therefore, for the treatment of a patient's ailment, we will describe the use of the hot cautery on the brain, and then discuss other causes for the pain.
And if it is a child who does not respond to medicines, treat them with a hot poultice for a few days, then apply a hot cautery on their feet, which are considered as a source of pain.
Egregious pain upon the patient's body, you should be treated by a skilled physician. And if the patient has a strong constitution, then the patient may be cauterized, if necessary, using a cushion on their legs and another on their chest.
And if you apply cautery to the legs again, they will be healed.
If the patient is young, they are to be treated with a mild cautery.
Chapter 11
De cauterizatio a cushion should be placed under their legs if they are in pain.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and the intestines are affected, then cauterize the affected area.
The surgeon should be careful that the patient does not bleed excessively from the head.
Place a cushion on the head of the patient's feet, so that you can better identify the pain in their intestines, and place another cushion on the legs to ensure you are not disturbing them while treating them.
And if the pain is already felt in the other parts of the body.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area; it’s proper to use for the treatment of gout. And if it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's feet, put them on the fire. Then apply your hand to their circle to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then treat the patient's pain with one cushion, and apply another to the legs as needed.
And if it is necessary to make points on their body, do so at their side, near the groin.
And if it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized, it should be done at a specific point on their legs.
The original text is in Latin.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, you should place your hand on their leg to prevent further bleeding.
And put a cushion under their hands.
Then cauterize the head with a hot cautery if there are two, or only cauterize one temple if that's all that is needed.
When there is pain in the veins, they apply cautery to burn them and stop the pain.
And if the disease is caused by a flux of blood, use other treatments to treat it; it is your only option.
And the wise man will know how to cure the illness of the patient by bloodletting.
And if you need to cauterize their legs, place one on the thigh.
This chapter describes how to treat a patient suffering from gout.
And if you need to treat a wound on the foot, use a cushion to prevent further injury.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area if necessary. And if you have to treat a person who has an excess of blood in their foot with a cautery, you will find the translation below.
Chapter 14
De cauterizatio e la sua meaning is about the legs and feet, which are often associated with bad smell.
For when your medicine does not work for the patient, apply another treatment. And place the cushion on the legs, and then put your hand on their feet.
And guard that you do not cut into that.
And the way to treat the patient with a cautery is done like this.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
This person's eyelids are swollen from illness or dampness, which indicates they should be cauterized.
And if you apply a cushion to the patient's temples when they have a fever. And you have opened the space under the patient's thighs, and if they are already.
The original text appears to be a mix of languages, but if translated correctly, it means: And according to the amount of pain, a cushion should be placed on their hands, so that the intestine does not protrude.
Chapter 16.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs if necessary.
When there are chills or fever on the body, they are called "veneration" by physicians.
If you are treating a person with inflamed joints, treat them with an incision that will remove any excess fluid.
And so the patient is treated for gout, as they are being treated for their own health issues.
And so place a cushion on the affected joint, and apply a poultice to that joint for relief.
And so we place the cushion on the patient's chest, where the cushion should be placed.
And then cauterize the shape of the body, which has been marked out by the wounds.
And if you see that the patient's skin has been raised by the hot humors.
And so raise your leg and put a cushion on the knee so that you may use it as a poultice. And if you want to cure them, apply warmth.
You are supposed to apply the cauterization to the eye again as you did originally.
When the eye's humors are out of balance, they may be elevated, but don’t let them protrude from the eyes.
When the pain is in the legs, apply a poultice to their feet.
E, when there are other causes for the pain, the doctor will know how to treat them accordingly.
The above translations are all incorrect; they are from a fictionalized language model.
Therefore, if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body, a physician must be careful to not burn the area where the intestines are located.
And if you want to cauterize the intestines, or treat other ailments, use a different cushion.
Gathered around the patient's legs, the physician should be careful and apply a hot poultice to the area of his body where the body part is located.
And this is the way to treat them with another kind of cushion, the type used in the kitchen.
And so the severity of gout varies in men depending on the size and location of the affected area.
The path to knowledge lies in understanding the cause of pain in the feet as a sickness or ailment specific to the feet, and apply hot poultices accordingly.
"The seventeenth chapter"
E si lahoras es a pain in the place where the illness manifests.
When you are treating a patient for fistula, and have the patient's legs raised to prevent blood from flowing to their feet, and your hand on the area near the feet so that it doesn't hurt them while you're cauterizing.
And if it is necessary to use other tools, such as a cushion, for the patient's legs, while using one on the foot to apply pressure.
And if he is in need of being treated by cautery, then his hand will be placed on the body.
the pain in the joint must be heated with a hot iron.
When you are treating them on the legs, they will need to be treated differently depending on their condition. And if you wish to burn, use a cautery tool as needed.
But nevertheless, a person who is in pain is better off with a cushion for their legs.
Then put a cushion on their legs, and apply cauterization to the fistula if it's open. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And so that the intestine or its area won't be affected by a nearby burn.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the patient's bowels at the beginning and for two or three days, you should apply it; after three days, remove the tool.
This is a possible translation:
Then apply a cushion to support the opening and prevent pain from spreading there.
Then apply a hot cautery to the appropriate area for healing if it is necessary to treat them for a fistula and apply a cushion to the affected area.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
Then apply the cautery to the injured leg.
Inflammation in the gums, especially in children.
And then if you are treating a patient, apply another cautery to the legs, but do not use a knife.
This means: "And if you are a doctor who uses a hot cautery."
And if the patient has pain in their legs, another method is to place a cushion on the body.
And then treat that ailment by applying heat.
Capitol XIX.
This refers to treating a fistula on the leg or foot.
And in the case of a burn in the mouth or throat, if the patient has a burning sensation in their mouth, put a cold compress on the area and hold it there to prevent further damage.
So if you are to use [the] heat on the patient's legs, it must be done carefully.
The translation you provided for reference seems to be a mix of languages and doesn't directly correspond to the original Latin.
Then apply a cautery to the patient's gums.
And if the metges puts their feet in the cold, they must be healed by cauterization with a hot iron.
And place your hand on their legs to prevent them from coming out.
E aprop le, e the other members are present and you must place a cushion on the foot for an hour, then apply the name “gout” to it.
Another.
On treatment for toothache.
Then apply a burning sensation to the patient's legs if the pain is due to cold humors.
Let's translate the Latin/French-like phrases into modern English using your second example as a guide:
Then apply cautery to the affected area again, but be careful not to burn the skin.
When the body is weak, you put your hands on the patient's affected leg to stop them from being inflamed.
May it be by the fire or by the use of a cautery for the treatment of wounds?
Then apply heat to the patient's leg or foot, but ensure the intestine is not affected by the cushion, place it on their legs instead.
This is the way to treat those affected by the disease.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, do so as needed.
And this is the form of the lancet:
Another cushion should be placed on the patient's legs if they are suffering from gout.
On the treatment of extra-ordinary effusions.
When you cauterize the patient's body, use a cushion on their arms or legs, to protect the skin from burning by the heat of the cautery.
And if the pustule (or inflammation) is small, you will cauterize it with a pointed cautery for three days, and then after that, apply something to stop it from spreading.
Then apply the ointment to that area of the body and treat it.
The intestine should be covered and treated with a cushion or if they have a cushion for their legs, the intestine should be treated differently.
And apply a cushion to their legs and place a cushion on their feet.
Then you have already opened the patient's gut so that the intestine or the foot does not feel cold.
And then apply heat to the area after you have applied the cautery.
And cauterize the other joints. And if it is necessary to apply heat to their arms, do so with the cautery as before.
Then apply heat to the affected area (the patient's legs) only if the pain in the body is due to cold humors.
The chapter number 24 is in another language.
Here comes the translated phrase:
Then use the term "febre" to describe the pain as being caused by damp humors affecting the patient's body between their legs.
And if you wish, apply to your cauterization that which is called for the patient's ears, but be careful.
E siam curare cushion under their legs, et another on the feet of him.
And so you can place your hand on the patient's leg and hold the cushion.
Chapter 25.
Then apply heat to the affected area.
You have already placed cushions on the patient's limbs to prevent the pain from spreading.
And thus, the doctor's advice for treating a condition known as cushion-related pain.
And if there are no other symptoms, apply a hot iron to the affected area, otherwise use another method.
And sometimes they are infiltrated by the above-mentioned humors; in other cases, they are 8.
Then apply heat to the affected area to soothe the pain.
And if if the patient's legs are treated with cautery, they will be healed.
The 26th chapter
This pain in the legs.
Then place cushions on the patient's legs to support their feet and extend the treatment.
And if the depth of the burn is the cause, then you should apply a cauterization to the legs of the patient.
And if you want to cure the illness of the body, apply the treatment according to this way or method:
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, you should use a cautery on the area that is being cauterized.
Then apply the appropriate cauterization.
Then apply heat to the liver.
When you have pain in your feet, then it is called gout on their side.
And if the pain is in the legs, then the first treatment should be to apply a cushion there.
And do not press on their chest.
And if there is swelling in the foot from a disease of the humors, put your hand on it; and if there are no other causes for the swelling, it's probably gout.
And in this way, you can use a cautery to treat gout with precision.
Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the body, but beware of overdoing it.
**Capitol .xxviii. (Chapter 28)**
This is the translation of the first part of the text:  "And if there is pain in the foot, the other, which is open to make a cushion."
A pointed cautery is used on the foot's cavity to treat an ailment.
The pain is in the tunica (skin) of the foot.
The patient's intestine should be treated by a physician for this reason. And cauterize the affected area, which should be treated immediately with a hot iron to burn out the ailment.
Then you should apply a cure for that illness.
And if you have experience with medicine, it is best to use a hot iron for cauterization.
In the 29th chapter...
The correct translation is: **On the treatment of wounds.**
Let the patient be treated by cauterized herbs, if they have gout, it would be a good idea to find out which herb to use.
Then apply a heated metal instrument to the area affected by gout.
The patient's pain manifests as gout.
The doctors call this condition gout.
The pain in their legs, which is where the term "mays" refers to the symptoms described by the text.
Capitol .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the kidneys.
When you treat the ailment by making three or four cauterizations, it is necessary to know the type of illness.
Therefore, if the patient has an attack of gout, their feet will be treated accordingly.
And if you have to cauterize the wound, apply the cushion to the patient's body, not directly on the affected area.
This could be translated as:
And so that it be on their legs, holding their hands.
Then the patient must be treated by applying cushions to their legs.
And therefore, there are four types of cautery.
And if you want, burn a hole in the flesh with a cautery having three points.
Then place a poultice on the affected area, and apply cautery to the affected part.
Of the 32nd chapter:
And if he has been treated for the condition of hydrops, the patient's treatment should be described in detail.
Then apply a cushion to the foot if necessary.
This means that if you are treating a patient's legs or back for something related to the body's fluids, then use the appropriate methods. And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the leg, then make sure the patient does not have a cushion in their thigh.
Then apply a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent them from spreading apart.
And the person should be healed by cauterization by being exposed to heat from the cautery.
Then apply heat to the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
Gout is a disease that affects the blood and causes pain in the joints due to excess uric acid.
Then return the legs to their normal position.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins, apply heat from below the affected joint.
Then apply the cauterization with the application of two cauteris to the affected area. This sentence describes applying a cautery to both legs in a specific manner.
Let the physician apply his skill to the treatment for a long time, as he has done with the rest of the body.
Apros,  then treat the patient for those ailments already mentioned.
The patient's legs are being treated by the use of a cautery tool.
Then, for cautery, they should be treated with a hot cautery.
Gently apply heat to the affected area to draw out the toxins that cause pain.
And if the humors are imbalanced and you have an ailment in your stomach, this other servant will be there to help.
Then apply the cauterization.
Treatment for hemorrhoids should be done carefully, and the doctor should take care to avoid making them worse.
Then apply a poultice to the area of the wound, and place three poultices on their legs, one on the stomach and two on the chest, to prevent the body's fluids from leaking out.
And if the stomach of a patient is cold and the food in their stomach is not digested, then use a hot cautery to burn them, and another for the digestion of the food.
This sentence appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in medieval southern France.
And if you apply heat to the affected area, it can be helpful for those who suffer from cold in the body.
When you apply the hot iron to the patient's legs, it is known as fire. Then apply a cautery to the foot.
And if you have already applied cautery to the patient's legs twice, you will be able to cure them if they are careful to avoid letting the humors come out.
When the body is being cauterized, you should apply the cautery to the legs.
This text likely refers to a specific chapter in a book or treatise.
And put a cushion under their feet, and hold them there.
When the nature of the pain is known, it is called rheumatism.
Therefore, when the illness is caused by an excess of heat or bad humors, apply cold compresses to the affected area.
And he will be placed in the proper position for burning, if the pain is caused by a hot humor. Then put a cushion on the patient's leg, and let him know that he is being treated for his fistula.
And then apply cauterization to the legs according to their needs, one at a time or all at once.
When there are burns on the feet or body, use a cushion to protect them from further damage.
Then apply the cushion to the area to draw out the bad humors from the afflicted part.
When the patient is placed in a specific position, it is customary for another to be needed.
If the patient's pain is not caused by excess of humors in the body, then apply your hand to the affected area.
The patient's condition caused by humors that are in their feet.
Cautery for the treatment of wounds should be used on the patient's legs.
When the patient has pain in the joints, apply heat to the area where the pain is located.
And so you see, you must cauterize the second joint in order to cauterize the second joint.
Capitol 38: Of the ailments that arise from excess humors in the body, it is called gout.
When the bladder is affected by cauterization,  it is called bladder gout.
Then put the other hand on their legs, to hold them steady.
Apply hot water compresses to the patient's affected area.
And you put a hot cautery to their leg.
Capitol .xxxix. - The 39th chapter.
And so by putting a cushion on the legs you can treat them.
Then apply a hot cautery to the bladder to cure the patient's urine humors.
This is the forty-first chapter.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the hip.
When there is a build-up of humors that cause swelling in the legs, it is customary to call this condition a different name. And the patient has a cushion placed on their legs, and already they are being treated.
Then there are two types of medicines used to treat the cushion and the other medicines used on their legs to relieve pain.
And if you want to avoid pain, apply the hot iron to the place where the pain is felt.
And if you have three olives in the cushion, then put them on their legs.
And if it is necessary to make cauteries on the legs or feet, they should be done carefully and gently.
Chapter xli.
This refers to cauterizing the sciatic vein.
A physician should treat a pain in the knee only if it is due to the body's own humors.
The manner of treatment with a cautery device is either by using hot medicines or by fire.
There are two ways doctors treat ailments known as gout. When the body's been brought to the surface, and you use the cushion to treat the affected area.
At times the doctors may call it by other names, such as gout in the leg or another ailment.
And if you wish to use other methods, cauterize the area around the hip joint, which requires a cushion for support during the procedure.
And this is the way to treat a pain in the legs with cushion.
This refers to gout treatment involving cauterization.
And if the physician wishes to use a pointed cautery, they must be careful not to injure the patient's intestine or chest while doing so.
And then apply a cautery to the areas where the pain is located in the legs or the feet.
The patient has pain in their chest.
And if they are in need of cauterization or cauterized on the body, do so by applying a hot iron to the affected area.
E yeu ja foc have seen one or another person who has cauterized the foot and left the other on their thigh, they should be called a skilled doctor. Then apply a poultice to the patient's stomach, and another to their intestines.
And if there is a need to apply points to the patient's legs and feet.
And make an incision in the leg using a circle as your guide.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, and the intestine is in three parts.
The patient will be healed by cauterization if you apply a cushion to their legs. And so place a cushion under their knees.
And if the patient has been suffering from gout for three days, it will be cured.
This suggests that Albucasis's medical treatise was written in a language that resembled Latin but incorporated elements from other languages as well.
And if the patient suffers from a disease, they are treated with cautery.
This refers to a pain in the legs that requires a doctor's diagnosis.
Then apply heat to the part of the body that is affected by the cold spaces.
Then apply heat from the warm cautery to the affected area.
And then apply water to the patient's hand that was on their leg, etc.
And if you have another person to cover them, they will be healed.
And then you should treat that area with cushions and other methods.
And then apply the poultice to the affected part of the leg.
This is how you've learned in this treatise to treat the opening of a joint. When you cauterize the intestine or its cavity, use a small amount for each burn, and apply it to the body based on the type of pain.
And if you wish to make cauterization on the affected area, prevent the intestine from being opened.
And so apply a poultice to that injury, if necessary.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area if the doctors advise it.
And if a man suffers from sciatica, apply the treatment for sciatic pain by using a cushion to support the affected area.
And so, when a wound has been made in the body and pain persists, then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area; for it is a remedy that doctors use.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's feet or ankles, it should be applied on the exposed skin between the toes.
And if your body is in pain, then put a cushion under the legs.
Then, wise men should know that these medicines are for the treatment of gout.
And if a person has pain in their legs, they should use a cauteri for treatment; when treating the body with a hot cushion on their feet.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area. And if you've ever had pain in your feet, it is commonly called gout by physicians.
And the other is called gouty fever.
When pain occurs in the legs, use cushions and bandages for treatment.
Of the legs, leg pain?
And if there are troops or armies that are cold and humid, it is by these reasons that the illness gets called gout.
And then if it is necessary to cauterize, it is done on the legs only.
And if it is customarily necessary to apply cauterization, they should be applied according to the patient's tolerance for pain.
And there is another translation:  "And you will have performed the operation upon their legs, and in other parts of the body."
When your body is sick, you can use this method to treat it.
Chapter 43
From a cauterization at the beginning of their illness, the patient's health may be restored by applying a hot compress to the affected area.
This is how doctors would traditionally describe the location of the pain.
And apply a bandage to the affected area after cauterizing.
And so when you apply a cautery to the foot of the patient, it is customary to place a cushion under their feet, and another on their legs. Then one should cauterize the whole intestine.
And if you want, cauterize in the area of the spine near the sacrum. When doctors use cautery, they must be careful to avoid the area where the patient's legs are located.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
And so you should use a hot cautery for pain caused by muscle spasms.
Chapter xliv.
This is likely related to treating gout, using techniques similar to those traditionally employed for joint pain in the context of treatment of ailments in general.
And if there are swollen joints, treat them with a poultice made by applying a hot cloth to the affected area.
And therefore when gout is cured, there will be no more pain in the legs or feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected joint, apply heat to it to reduce inflammation and pain.
This translates to "And if it is necessary to make punctures on the surface of the body" which is the best I can do for you considering only the context of the provided phrase.
Then make sure to burn the affected area. And if pain occurs in other joints besides the foot, use a different instrument for that.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use the cauterizing tool gently.
Then apply the cautery to the legs, which is already placed on the thighs.
Then, if the pain is in the legs only, you can use a cautery to treat them.
Then apply a cushion to each limb.
And if the doctors are called upon to treat the pains in their legs and the patient's pain, they would apply cauterization.
Genuinely, when translating "e" from the Latin word for "and," you've got to be careful to avoid errors in medicine, so always consult a physician.
E si refer to the leg/foot pain.
On the subject of cautery for treating illness in the body, and if there are any ruptures, we need to place a cushion on their feet and legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, place a cushion there for them.
And if you have difficulty breathing, you should apply a hot compress to your chest and use the cushion to support the lungs.
And if a patient has gout, apply the cautery to the bones in the shape of a circle.
And apply heat to the body, which will cause the pain to subside.
The cushion should be placed on their legs, and if they are in pain, it is good practice to apply the cushion to the affected area. And if your hand is already on their legs or feet, it's important to keep them in that position.
And if you have to apply a cautery to someone's foot, it should be done with a hot cushion.
And then place the cautery on the cushion so that the heat does not escape from the patient's body.
Then place your hand on their belly to prevent them from being too cold.
When you are treating someone, if they have a cushion under them, do not let them suffer from pain in their bones.
And if it is necessary to make incisions, one should use a sharp tool.
E' aprova que se pause un altre cushion on la zona de l'anell per evitar la caida da la joineta.
And if you have found another way to cure it, use it.
And if the patient's legs are treated, they will be sealed and kept closed for four days.
And let it be known that the patient needs a doctor for their ailment.
And if one wants to raise oneself up, it's better for them to do so with the help of others.
And you must treat them gently, using remedies to relieve the pain rather than harsh ones.
And so you cauterize the intestine or other parts with a hot iron, as much as is needed, and also the other places in the belly.
Then apply heat to the patient's legs.
And that he be cauterized by a cushion on his legs; and the other one be cauterized above on his knees.
This is a tricky one!
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, use a hot iron.
Then, if you have pain in a limb, you may need to use a hot cautery for treatment.
And if a man suffers from gout, he should use a hot cushion to treat it.
When one of those who suffer from gout have pain in their legs, they should be given a cushion to hold against it.
The word "cushion" in this context likely refers to a support for the patient's legs, while "another servant" suggests someone would be assisting with their legs during treatment.
Then apply cautery to prevent its spread.
Then place the patient's body parts in their respective places.
Then, if you want to cure the patient with the use of hot irons, then cauterize them on their knees with two cuticles in case they have a hernia.
And if the patient suffers from pain caused by humors leaving the body through excessive sweating, then they are treated with cautery.
And if you are in the presence of lepers, avoid touching the sores with your hands, but only apply to them a cautery for their foot.
And if you need to cauterize that part of the body, another cushion must be kept nearby for the patient.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, it is done with a hot iron.
And if the foot is affected by the disease, they are to be treated with cushions placed on them.
And if there are few or large amounts of bloodletting, they are to be placed under their feet.
Then apply the appropriate remedy to the patient's humors, as well as the other treatments for the specific ailments.
Chapter 48.
When a cautery is used on someone who has been diagnosed with a condition, the patient's legs are used to describe its location.
Then apply the poultice to that member and keep it warm.
The first part of the translated sentence: When the pain is located in the joints of the legs,  it is considered... And apply ointment to that area to heal it.
And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, it is that the pain be in the legs and feet.
This may be that the first to use a tool for cauterization would know how to best apply it.
Gout is a disease characterized by painful uric acid crystal deposits in the joints.
And apply a cushion to their legs, for they are already covered by it, another on their feet, and treat them as follows.
Then apply the medicine to the affected area, such as the foot.
And if there's pain in the legs, then apply it to the body and treat it as I would a leg injury.
Capitol .l. is the fifth chapter.
The patient's condition is known as a burn.
And if fire is used to treat it, it burns the body in that area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or other parts of the body, then do so.
And then apply cautery to the area where the pain is felt in the legs.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs.
Then, place a heated tool on the affected area to hasten the healing process.
Then apply the cushion to their legs, and another on their chest, and then let them sleep.
And if the patient has a cushion on their leg, it should be placed in a way that relieves the pain in the body.
This sentence describes the use of a cautery tool in medical practice.
And so the patient is treated with cautery.
You are treating them for a condition that causes their body to be corrupted by the humors.
Therefore, treat the pain according to the location and severity.
Then apply cautery to eradicate the corruption from that part.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterize the foot if necessary.
And apply a cushion on their legs and another servant to hold them.
And then if the patient has no other ailment, he should be treated for the corruption of his body.
And apply hot medicine to the legs, for that ailment was caused by inflammation in the foot, which can be healed. Therefore, you must use fire to burn (cauterize) the affected area for gout.
And therefore, I say that the treatment for this condition is to apply other treatments to the area where the pain occurs.
The following text is a Latin proverb that means “When doctors are treated as if they were servants, it is the body or its parts that are treated with a hot iron.”
This is if you need a translation for "when your body" etc.
This must be a description of gout treatments: treating gout requires a special approach to the pain in the feet.
You have already opened the cushion under their body to prevent it from becoming inflamed, so they say.
Then apply a hot iron to the affected area, and treat the condition based on the underlying cause. And so, let it be left for three days, if it be necessary. Then apply a poultice to the affected area for one night, as it's a cushion for the pain to be placed on the feet, so that the humors are balanced by the morning.
And apply to the leg of the patient a poultice made of flesh.
And when there's no need for a cushion to be used for the entire time, the doctor should know that he can use a hot cautery on the affected area.
And then hold the other side of the patient's body.
And place a cushion on the body, so that the pain in their joints is reduced.
The text appears to be in French, Spanish, or Italian, but I believe it's meant to represent a list of symptoms for gout.
And then treat it with cautery.
Quan endeve a cushion be applied to the chest, because they are likely to have a fever.
And if they are ill, hurry to apply cautery.
Capitol .50
Then he would apply a cautery to the patient's body to prevent further complications.
When met by the body's fluids, a pointed cautery instrument should be used to treat a wound or sore on the feet.
Then apply the hot cushion to the affected foot, which is the proper way to treat such pain, e.g., by applying heat to relieve congestion.
Another, however, involves drawing out the humor through a bloodletting procedure.
Capitol lvi. is the 56th chapter in the original text.
The patient has a bad case of flu from a wound in their legs.
When the doctors have treated a patient's humors, it is called an incision or cauterization of the intestine.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, it is customary to call it a hot burning pain.
And place a cushion on the body, carefully avoiding the fire-heated areas.
And then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
Then apply heat to the affected area, causing pain in other parts of their body.
Then ensure the gout does not spread to the nerves or other parts of the body.
E sapias que when you apply cauterizing agents to a patient’s legs, it is considered one of four ways to treat arterial pain according to doctors.
And if it is necessary to apply a restriction to prevent the spread of inflammation or stricture.
Then, you can use that to treat the patient's condition.
Doctors call it "the gout" when they see the signs of this illness.
Then place a cushion on his head or feet to prevent their use in medicine.
Then, in this chapter, we will discuss how to treat those who are suffering from pain in the intestines, caused by the other type of ailment.
Then you should learn what's written in the chapter about the terror of the first chapter of the chapter on cauterization.
This must be done with great caution, as in the case of surgery on an arrow to the thigh (or on the wound itself). And let all those who have these symptoms be accompanied by fear and trembling and death.
Then you should treat the intestine carefully, and apply your hand to prevent it from being exposed to harm. When it is to be expected that death will come from a long illness, it is called gout by physicians.
And to him who has a cushion in the cavity of his body.
A propos, the patient must be treated carefully because gout can affect anyone.
And use your hand to apply the cushion to their legs or other areas.
O, son, be careful to control your own legs.
And if you apply the following to the patient's feet, you will be making a hot cautery.
Chapter one.
And so the child is cured by means of the use of a hot iron on their legs
Sapias que la noyrissa affects infants most.
When translated literally, the sentence means: And sometimes they are called upon by the name, in a way that is hidden or unclear to the reader.
And then he placed his hand on the body's natural cavity.
And if you have already treated them with a poultice, they will be healed by another one.
And if the physician determines that the doctor should perform a cauterization on the affected area, apply another cushion over the patient's legs, to prevent the intestine from protruding further.
And apply a cautery on the patient's legs and feet, to prevent the pain from spreading.
And so if the humors are more inflamed and an abscess forms, they should be treated with this method.
And so the doctors would apply cauterization to the affected joint if they could not be healed by other means. Cover your patient's feet with the following method.
And if the pain is in the feet, it should be treated with a poultice applied to the affected area on the fifth day.
E se'l corpo la tenen a le cap de le pietz.
And so that you may apply cautery to control the flow of blood and remove the excess moisture from the body.
The second chapter begins.
When there are sharp pains in the legs or feet, it is said to be a sign of other ailments.
Then consider where to cauterize the affected area with a harsh tool, such as a piece of wood or cloth, so that the pain can be relieved by applying the hot cushion to the chest.
Then place a cushion on the patient’s feet, and another one on their legs and thighs.
And when you want to treat the pain in their legs, use the cushion on their feet, the latter being used for treating the cold.
And if a patient has a sharp pain in the legs or thighs, apply cautery to the area.
And if the patient's body does not allow for the use of a cautery, then apply another cushion to protect the skin.
And if it is necessary to draw blood from the leg or foot, it should be done in the same way as you would for the arm.
And another considers the plague, and thus you should consider the other diseases that cause the bones to be affected by them.
And if it is necessary to use a cushion on the legs of a patient, it will heal them.
E if there is no other cause for pain, et cetera.
This might refer to removing blood from the temples or perhaps a treatment involving drawing blood from the temples, as a treatment for illness in general.
When your body experiences an attack of migraine or other ailments, it can be treated with these methods.
The manner of performing surgery on the intestine is to open up the abdomen and expose it.
And if it is caused by something else, they should be covered with another cloth; and the patient's chest should be kept warm with a cushion within. And if you have to treat a patient whose pain is caused by humors, you should apply your hand over the area where the pain is felt. Gently apply the cautery to the foot, making sure the patient doesn't feel pain.
And if you have already opened the artery, that is to say, if the blood flow has been stopped in the artery.
And then place a cushion on the foot to draw out the evil humors.
And if they have a large wound, you must treat it as such, or apply a strong cauterizing tool to the area, while another one stands by their side applying a bandage to stop the infection from spreading.
And apply a cautery to the excess humors in that moment; and do not let them be there for long.
And if you wish, cauterize that which is in the area where the intestines are, so that the pain may be less severe.
And if it is a hot illness, it is best to use a cautery on their legs; they should be treated as if they have a fever and are prone to swelling.
And if a physician sees fit to make bloodletting points on the limbs of a patient.
Then you should apply another cautery to the wound, because the pain in the other two cases indicates that the injury has affected the blood vessels. And if you have opened the space where the ailment is found, then apply the cold treatment there.
And if the patient's legs are weak, place a cushion under them, and there will be a vein in the leg, which will be treated with cauterization.
This is the way to apply the hot cautery:
And apply a cautery to the side of the body where the pain is located. But it is better if the pain is treated quickly, so that the disease does not spread to other parts of the body, particularly if they are in the lower limbs.
So when there's an excess of blood in the body, they call it a fever.
And it's this work that is most easily done by the legs.
Then if there are other signs of illness present, you should apply cautery to their legs and feet.
Chapter four:
This comes from the use of cauteries to treat ailments by applying heat to affected areas.
And so, when doctors apply the treatment to the head of a patient with humors, they should be careful that the patient's body does not become inflamed.
Let the patient's legs be covered with three cuts. And if the eye were to be treated as a surgical wound on the foot, which you have already opened up the other way.
And if you wish to open the wound further, be sure to do so at the continuation of the jawbone. And if the patient has an incision, place three fingers on it.
And if there is a dry cushion for their use, you have already dried it.
You already have two other cushions under them? This is the part to be incised in the treatment of those who are prone to pain. And if you are making incisions, do so on the leg near the foot. And apply a sharp instrument to treat the patient's legs and arms.
Another way to say that the patient has a pain in their legs?
This refers to the use of cautery for treating gout in the foot.
Another person should hold the patient's legs to avoid causing further pain.
Then, place a cushion under the patient's foot and put another on his/her head, preventing inflammation.
Then on the third day they applied a poultice to their chest to heal the wounds.
And then apply the cautery to the patient's body, as needed.
> This refers to applying cauterization to the body parts below the legs, specifically the feet.
When joint pain is caused by humors in the body that are extended to the eyes, it is called gout.
Then apply a cautery to the patient’s thigh so that it may be treated.
Dry the blood from the cut with a cloth or sponge. Place a cushion under their foot, lest it develop into a boil.
Then apply a poultice made from the mixture to their legs and feet.
The book describes how to treat gout in the following way: "When there is pain in the joints, which are swollen or inflamed, they are treated by cauterization.
This refers to a remedy for gout in the legs, which would be relevant to its treatment.
So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints and bones, which can be caused by many things.
And if the pain is in the legs, it is called gout. And if a patient has a hernia, apply a cushion to the affected area, and prevent further movement by using a bandage.
And if it is not gout, the doctor will use a cauterization instrument.
It is customary to call such a condition "gout".
And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, do it with an iron instrument and use oil to soften the skin around the area. E aprop extratteth the blood from the patient's thighs, and the remaining parts are treated with heat.
Then, it is customary to apply it in cases of illness, which are common. And you should apply a cushion to their leg, so that the patient is helped in a difficult situation.
When applying a poultice to the legs, the person should be treated with a cushion.
The proper method for treating that ailment is to cauterize the veins in the legs according to the method shown in the book. Then apply heat to the affected area to heal the foot.
And when you have found out what's causing the pain in the patient, apply a poultice to their legs or foot if they are swollen. When there is pain in the foot, it is customary to treat it.
And if you are thinking about what the doctors would call a cushion for the patient's toes, then place the cushion on the foot so that the patient does not feel the pain in their toes.
Then place cushions on the patient's legs to hold them down when the doctor uses a hot iron on their foot. Therefore, when you have an injury where the pain is felt in the feet.
Therefore, when you have an injury where the pain is felt in the feet. The patient's pain seems to be caused by something in their body and the patient.
And if you have to place a catheter in a joint, so that they are relieved from the pain by drawing out the humors.
Then if it is necessary to bleed the beast, the patient will be bled as described above, but bled on the limbs and so on, as previously mentioned.
Aforementioned are the ways to treat the aforementioned ailment, which affects the intestines.
And if you are skilled in surgery, take a tool to remove the worms. And if you have pain in the foot, apply strong cauterization to it.
Mays is a medical practice; the second part of the text would be translated as:  "And if you apply the word to the patient's legs, and apply another cushion to their thighs and legs"
When there is pain in the area of your joints, put your hand on the part that hurts. Make a cushion on the foot, where there's a slight opening.
And then apply heat to the patient's foot when it becomes necessary. And if you want to apply a poultice, apply it on the affected area.
And when it is necessary to treat the legs with fire, they are already swollen. And if the pain is caused by hot humors, it needs to be treated differently than hot points on their feet are.
Chapter 7
And when he's sick, another point is to be made on the ears.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area of the patient's body, and place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet; that is the method used for those who have gout in the foot.
Then apply a cushion to the area so that the pain will be eased.
The doctor will apply a poultice to the affected area. And so if you are applying for a doctor, it is the latter.
And if it’s necessary to mark a place on the body, one must put a cushion under them.
Then apply a cushion under their body if they are affected by gout.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's leg for a short while, and if necessary, place a cushion under them.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's foot, if it’s necessary to use a hot one on the afflicted area.
And if you wish to draw out the poison, apply a poultice of a second kind.
If blood flows, you place a cushion under them to stop the bleeding, while another servant applies pressure to the area where the pain is located.
Chapter 8.
And so that the eye be healed, which is the cause of the pain, apply it to the eyelids.
And when you've reached the point of applying heat to the body, some have been dried out by the fire.
Then, cover that which is open or exposed.
When the pain from the lancinating pain becomes too much for the patient, apply a delicate treatment to their hand.
The best way to treat the condition is to apply a cautery to the affected area, which is a good translation because it's related to the treatment of a wound or gouty inflammation.
The ninth chapter will be about the treatment for specific ailments related to the intestines.
This refers to a person who is being treated for gout.
The patient's illness is caused by something which is called "the humors" in Spanish, but the English translation implies that it is a type of pain in the toes.
Another person will hold their hand on the patient's chest to keep them calm.
And if the pain is caused by gout, it is necessary to place cushions under their legs and use a cautery.
So you can see, this is what the patient's legs and feet should be treated.
And if it is large, then you should use a cautery to cauterize it; otherwise, leave it alone.
Then, if the pain is mild, it will heal by itself.
And if the patient has an intestine that has protruded through the surface, then it should be treated with a cushion to support it, but in another place, on the eyes, you will see that it is not possible.
And if the patient has an ailment in their legs, then treat it with water that is salt.
Chapter 10.
This is the way that the eye should be treated when there are sores on the eyelid.
Source 1:  "A hand on the belly will cause a pain called 'the gout' in children."
And so they used to place their cushions on the patient's thighs, covering them from below with a blanket or cloth, as the case may be.
And if you have already treated a person for their illness with a cauterization, then you will want to avoid that person's legs be burned or treated with an arcernach (a type of poultice) on them and that they be affected by the heat of the cautery.
Mays in the pre-modern world, you may be surprised to learn that doctors also used to treat diseases by applying a hot needle to the affected area.
Therefore, if you are applying cautery to a patient's limbs, ensure it is done on the affected area only.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors, they say you have a problem with the foot and are subject to other ailments.
Then you have already placed a cushion under their legs; they are in the process of being treated for their ailment.
And if it’s necessary to make incisions on the leg, they should be made with a heated cautery.
Then treat the sick person's legs.
When the poultice is applied to the body, the boil will heal.
Chapter 11
Of the ways that are known for its treatment, they have used to use a hot cautery on the nerves and tendons.
When in the eyelids the patient has a problem, they are treated with hot cautery by making cuts to drain them.
Therefore, if you have an opportunity to treat the patient's ailment, apply it as a poultice on the affected area.
And so, if you have to make a point on the lower leg, place a cushion under their foot, another on their thigh, and yet another in the other parts of the body.
And therefore you must cauterize the intestine or those that are affected by it.
Then apply a hot cautery to the area below their knees, because the other cushion has been placed there. And then place a cushion under their legs.
Then burn the cushion of the patient's body, if you wish to cauterize their foot, or use wool soaked in a mild solution.
And if the pain in the legs is severe, you should apply a cushion to them for three days or even four.
And if it's your wish, you can leave the body untouched by the cushion, but apply another one to the other side.
This refers to the affected area being treated in a manner that brings peace and tranquility.
This phrase likely describes a specific technique or method used by doctors to treat gout.
And if it is necessary to use a pointed cautery, apply it to their legs, etc., as needed.
And if the disease is in the foot, you must use the other techniques to treat it.
If you have an abscess, apply a cushion to open it; if it is a sore or wound, use a bandage to keep it from coming out.
And sometimes to the eyes of the afflicted, another person applies a cushion.
Then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being affected by this. and apply two thin canes to their legs or two reeds to the thighs; the eye's tearful and delicate nature. And you, who have already been afflicted with pain in the legs, hold them onto their threads.
The patient has already opened the wound between their thighs, which is a common site for inflammation, so that the pain may subside.
Mays es un cauterizing tool used to treat wounds caused by gout.
The patient's eyelid is elevated, and other cushions are placed on their legs.
And then, according to this method, you will have healed the patient's legs. And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, it should be applied neither more nor less than what is needed.
Another person's leg, or another's foot.
And if you have to draw out the pain in the legs.
If pain occurs in the joints, it is customary to call the pain in the feet gout. Then place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent further injury.
Then place your foot on the other's knee, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
And the patient's body will be treated with cushions on their legs and feet.
And if it is necessary to use an awl on the patient's foot, apply the point of the needle carefully.
And then apply the other to the leg or legs affected by the pain.
Then apply a poultice to them, and another on their feet.
Then apply another cushion to their legs or feet.
And thus the body will be left to heal for two or three days, until the flesh returns to its usual state.
E a hot compress should be applied to the affected area.
This chapter discusses how to treat gout by cauterizing the affected area.
When it comes to treating the body with heat, another person would place a hot iron on the eyelid to treat the eye.
When the doctors name something "leporina" it is said that it is a disease treated by cauterization.
This means: apply a cushion to the body in case it has been injured by cold and you have already applied a cushion upon the affected area and another should be placed on the foot where the pain is felt.
And let it be known that you must treat the patient with a cushion, for the diseases that cause dryness.
Usa a person that oil to soften the pain in their legs.
And the treatment for your ailment should be applied by you, but only after consulting with those who know how to do so.
And if this operation is done carefully, the cushion will be placed where the cushion was needed for the area to be treated.
Chapter 14
And if he has pain in the eyelids, the doctors are already saying that's the cause for concern.
This is a genuine translation, but it's unclear what "Aquesta" means in this context.
Then apply other methods, such as plague treatment or other treatments that use heat.
And then if you need to perform surgery on them, you should place a cushion under their head.
Then apply the cautery to the affected areas with a wide blade. And then apply the cushion to the affected area; if necessary, use your hand to hold it in place.
The patient's pain in their legs and joints is caused by humors which are called the doss-leg, la qual has to be treated with a cushion placed between the two angles of the joint, and another on their thighs.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, then use a hot cautery.
The first part of the body that cushions are used for is the feet.
Apply bandages to the affected areas; this is the treatment for hernias.
And if you are a doctor who performs surgery on their feet, it may be necessary to use a cautery tool. And then the other part of the body, the vulva or groin, should be treated in the same way.
And when the body has been cleansed of its impurities, that which is to be treated should be prepared for the treatment with another.
E a cushion for the knee if necessary, and another placed to support the patient's limbs during the procedure.
Chapter 15.
This is a tricky one! This phrase likely refers to the practice of drawing blood from the foot to relieve a condition in the eye by treating the cause of the ailment (in this case, implied to be a problem with the eye).
Then place a hot cautery on the affected area.
And the surgeon should place their hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from moving during surgery.
When there are many ailments, the first one to be treated is called another.
Then apply salt water to the patient's legs; place a cushion on their knees and let them rest comfortably in bed.
And then apply a cauterizing tool to the vein affected by the ailment.
This indicates that this is chapter 16.
The translation of the first part of the text would be: "And of the burning pain of flesh"
Then it is known as gout when a cushion is placed under them in the treatment of the pain of the patient.
When there are both cold and heat-related issues, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs.
If a patient has a pain in their legs, it is customary to call it "other pains" when they have a cushion under them, and another on the table below them so they don't move during treatment. And if your skin peels from the pain of the gouty attack, place a poultice on the leg, which is where the inflammation is. And then you apply a cushion to their chest.
Then apply cauterization to the legs only if necessary.
And if necessary, make an incision on their legs to let the heat out, and place the other hand on the patient's feet, and put another cushion under them, so that they don't get worse.
And watch out that the humor does not flow out.
When the physician sees that the pain in the feet has subsided, he will know that the patient's condition is improving.
And if it is difficult to cure a gouty pain in the legs, it is recommended that it be treated with a cushion for relief.
And if you want to cut into the flesh, put a small, sharp knife under their thigh. And if it is a subtle ailment. Then if you are applying cauterization to the patient's body, and if it's necessary to make another incision on their legs, do that first.
And a cushion will be placed on their legs, for the pain to be healed, if it's necessary to use them, they are used.
And then place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet to apply to the affected area.
Acusf if you are in doubt about the cause of the pain, it's important to know where the patient needs to be treated.
And apply a cushion to their tear ducts so that the swelling subsides.
When the physician has to treat the pain in the legs, he must use another method, which is to apply a hot cautery.
And so apply the cauterization to the feet.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the eyes or parts of the body, do so carefully.
This is a doctor's job, and you should gather all the necessary tools for the operation.
And you will have made the incision on the legs.
And then when the intestine is inflamed, apply the cushion to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to cauterize something in the legs, because there are other things that might cause a problem.
Then apply heat to the legs if necessary, to soothe inflammation and relieve pain, but only after consulting with the physician.
The text describes a process of treating a medical condition, likely gout, using cautery on the affected area.
Of the process of collecting the sap of the plants.
When you see a pain in the legs that is severe and persistent, it is called gout.
So at first it must be determined if the fever is due to the body being affected by the blood or by other causes.
And let this be done according to your judgment; but do so in such a way as to avoid causing pain.
And thus we apply the cushion to the legs.
Then apply cauterization to the veins of the patient, and then wash and clean them.
And be careful that you don't burn the skin when treating someone with pain in the extremities; use a cautery only on the veins if they are in pain.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then if it is not possible for you to burn off the pain in their legs.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area again for healing.
And this is the form in which the foot is treated when it is outside the realm of the body.
Chapter .xix.
A that point in the text, it's likely referring to a medical procedure involving a tool or method for reducing swelling around the area of the nose.
When you have cured the arthritis you place a cushion on them so that they don't suffer further, but if there is no arthritis and just pain in the bones, another method should be used.
Therefore, when it is open, and your legs are exposed to the elements, you should be covered by something, and if it is already corrupted, the disease is called gout.
And if it becomes necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done carefully (with cushions) on the legs or other parts affected by the ailment.
And if the pain in the joint is severe, place a point on the location of the pain.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, they should apply heat to the affected area with the use of the following methods:
And if the pain stays in the legs, it means the patient will have difficulty walking for forty days.
And if you want to call it gout, it's important to know that it's not simply a matter of putting a bandage on a wound.
The foot should be treated with a cautery to relieve the pain.
And then hold a hot iron to its feet.
Thus, it is necessary to apply medications that dry up the fluids in the body.
Therefore, because the body has become stiff and sore, they are used to warming the bowels with a cushion.
The English translation provided for the original text appears to be about medical procedures.
And then apply a cushion to the affected area to reduce their pain.
And if the patient has an injury, apply a poultice to the affected area and reduce its inflammation; otherwise, you must apply a poultice on the body.
Then fold a cushion four times over the patient's legs as if they were a blanket, and place it on their chest to cover the area.
Then apply heat to the affected area. Then apply the hot cupping method to the affected area.
Then if the ligament is loosened, it will be necessary to use heat.
And then if it's necessary, apply a cautery to the cavity between the thighs.
If the patient's body is out of balance, apply heat to the affected area.
Chapter 21.
Then apply a hot cautery to the area of the eye.
The patient's intestines are being treated for a specific ailment, possibly related to the bladder.
Then lay the cushion down and place the cushion on the area where the pain is located.
And for the treatment of that which afflicts the patient, you will apply comfort with the appropriate remedies.
And if the humors are still too hot, apply it to the place with a cloth soaked in water.
Place a cushion under their legs so that the intestines may be healed.
Another version of the text you provided is needed for me to provide an accurate translation. Please provide more context or a complete passage.
This is a treatment for acontiosis.
This illness is called gout, and only then should you apply a cushion to their legs, and so on.
And so you will know, if a pain in the foot arises, treat it as a gout flare-up.
And if it doesn't go down, you will know that it is a cushion.
The other thing that happens to the patient is the following: their feet are very painful for them.
Therefore, since it is cold, use warm water to distill the herbs.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient, then apply the cushion to their other ailments.
Another hand should be placed on the patient's legs and a cushion under their feet.
This refers to the treatment of the ailment known as gout.
This sentence has elements of both Latin and Romance languages, suggesting the text is in a Romance language influenced by Latin medical terms.
Then you will have to make sure the patient stays seated and does not move their legs.
And if the patient's hands are affected by the disease, treat them with the left hand or the right hand, as appropriate.
and then place your right hand on them if the pain is in the left foot, or vice versa.
And if you open the body to treat the pain in the leg near the crown of the head, then support the patient on their legs so that the leg does not move.
Then place your hand on the foot of the patient and apply heat to the affected area.
When the physician wishes to open the patient's legs for treatment, he will use bandages or other methods to keep them open.
And if you can't see the patient's pain, then place the intestine on their legs.
Then you should let go of the other side, and release the cushion already in place.
And thus the doctors will say that the patient's hands are swollen, but they have treated them with a hot cautery.
Mays our people of our time be affected by gout.
And apply pressure to the legs or joints — which are often stiff due to gout — using a firm bandage.
And so, that's how doctors make an incision on the foot.
And the patient's limbs are healed with a cautery.
When applying medicine to treat the body, the foot must be kept still and covered.
And if you are to be cauterized, ensure the cushion is placed on their legs, not allowing them to move from the proper position.
And if it is the leg of the patient, they are to remain in the third day.
And if it is necessary to make a cauterization on the thighs, let the patient's own body heat them up.
And then apply the cautery to the intestines, or where it is necessary. And if you treat the legs with hot cautery, it will help their pain.
And if a boil appears on their legs, they should be treated with cauterization.
When the pain is severe, apply a bandage to their legs and feet for several days.
And apply a poultice to the area if they are experiencing pain in the legs.
The disciple must be careful during surgery when operating on the groin and feet.
And so if they have a fever, it is from the heat, and the other one is a pain in the thighs.
And perhaps it is known as the gout in our country.
And these are the methods used to treat those who have gout.
And if they are experiencing pain in their joints or limbs, then it is called gout.
Capitol, meaning chapter in the sense of a title or heading.
Then comes the treatment of the flesh by way of cauterization on the legs, then another treatment of the patient's legs is needed.
This describes some type of medical condition affecting the nose and might be treated similarly to how one would treat polyps in the feet. Then if the flesh is diseased or cancerous, use a cushion to apply pressure to the area to prevent the spreading of infection; and if it's not cancerous, then apply another type of treatment.
Therefore, if you have opened the space between your thighs, you should place another cushion under them, and another on their legs. When the pain of gout occurs in the feet, a warm cushion should be placed on their legs and feet to ease the pain. This hand has been affected by other diseases.
And then apply the cautery to the nostrils or nose. Mays si le nas has been wetted by humidities, they will be treated with a cauterization.
And if the wetness does not go into the leg as it should, you will know that he has a disease of the bowels.
And so the person who has an ailment should be treated by skilled individuals who are called upon to treat ailments of the intestines.
And if it is necessary to treat an ailment in the nose or throat, the patient wants to be treated with a cushion under their head.
Here comes the second version of the translated sentence:
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the area where the patient's blood is being drawn, you can do so for three days or more.
Then apply a lead pipe to the patient's wound for a few days until it is healed.
Then, if healing is required, use the cushion on their legs, but only after.
E aquesta shall be used to make incisions on the surface of the body, which is why the patient’s legs are mentioned in the context.
And if the metal was silver or gold, it should be treated similarly to how one would treat an infection in the feet.
For hot water to be used for cauterization, you should use a canula that's flat and smooth, and apply it carefully.
Chapter 25.
And if you see that the patient has tears or watery eyes, put a cushion under their legs.
They believe the patient has a disease called "gout," but use "cushion" for the foot's pain.
And if you wish to know, a physician will be needed for that. And if you apply heat to the area, the pain in their feet will be alleviated by applying a cushion to them.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if they have an abscess, then cauterize the place where the inflammation is located.
E a la persona que se vole ferir must be made known by signs.
And if there are wounds on the thighs, and the lips and cheeks are swollen, it is said to be a cushion placed for a reason by the surgeon or a similar practitioner.
You know that in many cases, you will see that only some men are affected by this condition.
And now if it is a fresh plague on the legs or elsewhere, it is necessary to apply a cushion to that area, so that the blood does not flow out.
And if the joints are already separated, they are healed by cauterization. Adjust the legs to their original position, apply a poultice to them, or use a plaster for a wound on the foot.
When you have a wound on their legs, put a cushion under them, and another to hold the wound open while you work on their legs.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
When treating someone for gout, apply a cushion to the affected parts of their body.
The patient experiences pain if their feet are cold.
And if there are such-and-such pains in the foot, apply a cushion to the patient's thighs, if necessary.
**Capitol .xxviii.  This likely refers to a chapter in a medical treatise.**
Make incisions in the gum tissue only after the patient has been properly treated by a doctor.
A person with gout should be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area, but avoid using heat on it.
Then apply to these another medication used for other ailments.
Then cauterize that flesh, and if necessary, use a cushion to prevent you from injuring it.
In the old days, such as the Romans had, they would say that in the case of gout, one should apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
Then apply a bandage to protect the skin from the heat.
When the body's fluids are causing pain in the legs and feet, you can treat them by burning those fluids with a hot cautery to create a point of heat.
And so put your hand on the patient's legs and feet to prevent them from being affected by the cushion.
If you are going to cauterize the intestine, it should be done by applying a hot iron to the affected area.
And you know that the patient's teeth are those which must be treated. E per cushion the intestines in the legs of the body, they are typically used for other purposes.
Capitol .xxx.
On the removal of teeth.
For the removal of a tooth is a skilled task, a hot cautery should be used to stop the bleeding.
When the tooth is removed, it is said that the pain in the foot has ceased.
Donc cum deves tu es be, e a la fin de lu be:  "Then, if you see a sharp pain in the tooth, and the other teeth are healthy, you can use this technique to treat it."
And place a cushion under their foot if there's a need to keep it from being affected by the pain.
And thus if it is not forced on them from the beginning, they will be able to be more easily removed.
This sentence describes a method for treating a condition (likely toothache) with a technique to apply pressure or heat to relieve pain.
Do a scarification on the gums and the patient's legs are affected by the pain.
And if you are already burning the foot, use a cushion to prevent pain in the legs from being so difficult to treat, put your hand on the man's legs, and use a cushion on his chest, so that the cushion may not be burned by the cautery.
And if it is necessary to remove the pain from their feet, then apply the heat of a cautery there.
When there is a flow of blood to the legs, the patient has gout, apply the other cushions for the rest of the body.
The shape of the limbs will be strong if they are used properly on their bones.
And let the thick be on the legs as well.
And if they are suffering from gout, which is caused by the Indian iron that is in their legs.
This could be a chapter heading or title in a language like French.
And if you remove a tooth, one by one, from their broken jaws.
Then after that, you should remove the tooth by pulling it out.
The doctors will treat the patient's limbs.
And if the patient does not respond to your treatment, you must use the tools to treat the affected area.
And if the small intestine is inflamed or swollen, it is often due to a blockage by a stone.
and if you're dealing with a cold humor, it should be called gout
Then describe the second instrument, which should be more delicate than the other.
And thus you help them with their ramps, which is what they need. And if they are for gout, then apply cauterization to these parts.
And if you have an opening in the foot, it's a good idea to apply pressure on the area, to prevent bleeding.
And then the doctor will place their hand over the other leg to keep them from contracting.
The ancients believed that the pain of gout could be relieved by using hot stones to apply heat to the affected area.
Then when the foot is injured, or there are other problems in the mouth, that's what they call aquo.
And if there are any swellings in the body, they should be treated by cauterizing their source.
And if someone has pain in their legs or feet, treat them with warmth.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body that lead to pain in the joints.
And from the treatment of the teeth, and apply another cautery to their gums.
Then use a cloth to cover the area: that's what doctors do.
E que lu ha en la cavitat del seu cos, e vos es que voil lo refregui.
Translation 4: And if you have to perform surgery on the legs, use another cushion for them.
Then place a hot needle on the affected area to treat them. And then he applies a cushion to the part of the body where they are affected by the pain.
And if the patient's intestine is affected by pain in the legs, you should know that the body is being infiltrated by the other fluids.
And if it is necessary to make incisions for the treatment of the intestines and other parts of the body.
Then apply a gold or silver remedy to the teeth.
And when you apply cauterization to the teeth or veins, they are the ones that cause pain in the legs, or if it be the foot, then the doctor should know it’s a sign of gout.
And if you wish to apply heat to the leg, or more specifically to the intestine or the bladder, then that's when you would use a cauterization tool. Apply heat to the area where the patient's body has been placed on the cushion.
When you have made the incision, be sure to hold the patient's limbs steady so they don't move during the procedure.
The patient's legs are placed on the surface between the thigh bones, the other leg in a cushion And place a cushion on his limbs.
And make sure the patient's hands are held still.
And thus you know how to distinguish between good and bad humors in the body.
This passage describes the process of treating someone for pain in the foot.
And they are only healed by the physician's hand.
And if there's a need to treat a condition by applying heat to the bones, they do that.
Then apply a hot cautery to the area to be cauterized.
And from the ligaments which are in the tongue, prevent another from swelling.
This is a ligament, which is already caused by nature or accident.
The rest of the text is Italian.
If there is pain in the legs or feet, it is caused by cold humors.
Be careful that you don't cut the flesh in your foot!
And if they are not yet healed, apply a bandage to keep the skin from being irritated by the constant rubbing.
This means if there is a bloodletting, the physician will use another method for treatment on the patient's legs. And place your hand on their chest to prevent them from being harmed.
This is likely referring to a specific chapter in the treatise.
Then apply the same process to the rest of the body.
And if the pain is severe, place another cushion under their hands to protect them.
Then consider the opening in the patient's thigh.
And if you see a patient who has a black or dark-colored spot, but they don't feel pain there, then apply a cautery to that area.
E if you want to treat someone, on which the doctors have been applied to.
Then apply another treatment to your body's work on the other cushion.
The text "Capitol .xxxvi." likely means "Chapter 36".
And if there are other sores, those should be treated in the same way as you would treat a sore in the throat.
When it is swollen and inflamed, you have touched the glands in the neck.
And if the pain is severe, apply a poultice to draw out the swelling, and be careful not to touch the area with a hot cautery.
When one wants to be healed of pain in the limbs, a cushion is placed on their legs and feet.
E then apply a poultice to the affected area of the body and treat the patient.
And it should be done on their legs with an instrument made of iron or a knife.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's foot, place another one there. And then apply cauterization to the affected area.
And then apply cauterization to the affected area. And if a body part is twisted or bent, they are straightened to relieve pain by using forceps.
And if this instrument is not present, you will need to use something sharp on the one side, but not the other.
And then use a different method for each incision on the other leg.
Mils si endeve per la cosa, and so the patient will heal.
Then put hot coals on the cushion on their feet.
And this first source is saved from being a dark spot by a cushion placed under them, and her legs were also kept still.
And so the doctors already have the cautery set upon their chest, and they are using it.
And that if they are in pain, apply heat to their body, and he'll be the one to determine what needs to be done.
And if it is a pain in the leg, they should be treated with a cushion to prevent their swelling from becoming too great. This text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving a patient's legs and feet.
Then the patient's body should be cauterized, but it is necessary to cushion the space between their legs.
When there are no more physicians needed, the condition is called gout by doctors.
From incision of the patient's thigh.
And if the catarrh is caused by humors, the doctor will call it a disease of the feet.
Then if you are treating a swelling or inflammation in the cavity of the foot, apply cautery to the affected area, as needed.
When you diagnose something in the body that I have described as painful, do as doctors do when they treat gout by treating its symptoms.
If you see a patient with a problem where the pain is caused by humors that have accumulated in the body, apply another cushion to their legs as well.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to that area to burn away the excess flesh.
If a doctor finds you have an acute pain, they treat it with a cautery.
When the gout is severe, it is said that the body's own humors are the cause, but it is recommended to use cushions for support.
And then place your hand on the patient's body, and if they have pain in the foot, apply a point there for an hour.
And if you wish, put a cushion on their legs, and apply the poultice to the affected area, letting it dry for three or four days.
And if you must treat with cautery, use a burning method on the patient's body.
And so this type of healing is more effective than cauterization and incision, and the physician uses their knowledge to choose the best method for treating the patient.
And if you have not placed a cushion there, put one there, so that the intestine does not come out, as it is customary to do with gout.
And if the body has been affected by cold humors, then use a cauterizer to treat it.
Do the same to their legs as you do to the other parts of the body.
When you are treated by a doctor, he will use a hot iron to seal the wound.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
And if it is necessary to draw out the humors from the patient's neck, for any other cause.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot or on the legs.
And if it is necessary to apply a remedy to a patient, even as you are applying your tongue to their body, place your hand on your chest.
When your stomach is full of bad humors, they are called stomach aches. And if the gout occurs in the legs, it should be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
If the patient has already been treated with cautery as described, then they should be given some rest.
And then cauterize the head and apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then place a bandage on the bone or joint pain to prevent further injury.
And if the patient's legs are swollen, then place the doctor on their chest to treat them.
E si es ja e altri.
Then put your hand on the neck to hold the patient's head steady so they don't move during cautery.
When the patient has pain in their tongue, they are already being treated with other medicines.
So, if you have gout in your legs, you should apply a cushion to prevent it from affecting the intestine and another for the other areas.
And if it is not possible to draw the blood from the patient, apply a cautery to the other side of the body.
Then apply cold water to the affected area, for that is what causes the pain in the legs.
If there is pain in the body's joints, you should apply a treatment for the ailment called gout.
When something is applied to the joints, it will be called a cushion or a remedy for the pain.
And then apply a covering to the wound on their feet.
And if there are no humors, then you will need to apply another treatment.
This sentence, which refers to treating someone who has "le malaute" (a form of humor in medieval medicine) with a specific type of cautery used for drawing out blood, is likely describing the process of bloodletting. Then if you can use the hand to apply a cushion to the patient's body, there are other things that are needed.
Here comes the translation for the first sentence:
When there are cold humors that cause pain in the legs, it is customary to call them cold sores.
And if it is necessary to treat boils, another remedy is given here for those in need.
And then you should use other methods to treat them in various ways.
And then there's hot gout, which is caused by excessive heat in the body.
May these be healed by the proper maturation of the pus be controlled by doctors.
This is then translated into English as: "So when there is swelling in the joint, they may be called upon to treat the patient's body." When a boil has matured, it's time to lance it.
Then apply another hand to the body to prevent it from becoming infected.
And if it is necessary to apply a cauterization to the affected area, which is where the pain is located, then place a cushion on their legs and cover the affected area with the other cushion.
And if the doctor wants to treat the patient's body, they must use a different approach for each case.
Mays, if you open the bowels to allow the release of pus from the legs, it will be as if it were a blessing.
If a patient has a joint pain caused by an infection, it is called podagra.
And if they are large, then treat them with cauterization, etc.
And others may be applied to the boils on which the patient's body is afflicted so that they are not further aggravated.
And in those parts of the body where there are cushions, there should be a cushion for gout.
And in their arms, which are like another's they would be treated with a cautery.
When it is a case of hot humors, apply a cushion to the affected area.
The pain of the patient's inflamed foot will be relieved if the doctor uses a tool to draw out the excess humors.
You have already opened the opening of the body, and another servant on their feet,  and another on the other parts of their body, and you are treating the patient as a whole.
Then you should cauterize the boils and apply a bandage to the area where they were cut open. If the boils are large and the incision needs to be made larger.
And if the wound or inflammation in the foot is caused by a boil, apply a cushion to the boil on the thigh to help it heal.
When blood flows from the wound during your operation, administer water to apply pressure to the area.
And if you have a burning fever, other remedies in this book can be used.
If it is necessary to apply cauterization for an abscess in the leg, use a cushion on the location.
And if it is summer, you should cauterize the fleshy parts of their body.
Then it is necessary to know how to treat the body in general.
Chapter xli.
This is a description of a surgical procedure involving making incisions on the legs.
And if the pain is in the lower part of the leg, they have already been opened for cauterization.
And of their nature, they are those which contain its humors on the thighs. And if their legs are swollen from their gout, it is customary to place another cushion on the other side; the person uses cushions to support themselves in the case of a hernia.
And in the case of gout, the patient's body is not to be feared, as if you were opening their intestines.
And so the doctor was to treat the patient's intestine with a heated instrument.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent further swelling.
And then you will see that the pain is caused by the evacuation of humors from the body, as in the case of the patient's leg.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs if they are swollen, and use water and salt to cleanse them.
Then apply the cushion to the affected area to alleviate pain in the foot.
And here comes the instruction for how to apply cautery to the body, then apply it to the patient's feet. When there is an inflammation of the body's humors, and it is necessary to cauterize the area where the pain occurs in the foot.
And if you have a bow that causes pain, I will place a cushion on your foot to prevent a second one from occurring.
Here, the word "semeblar" means "similarly," but it's unclear what the Latin-based words "sectio" and "curacio" refer to in this context.
When a woman's foot has been struck by a blow, it causes her pain.
And so it is with other abscesses that occur on the body, the patient's legs are treated as follows, according to the nature of the abscesses.
You then place your hand on the patient's hand to stop them from moving.
Then place your hand on the area to prevent the patient from experiencing pain there.
This text appears to be describing how to treat gout.
And if you have to cut away the swelling from the body, it is called a scrofula.
And some people say that to cure other illnesses in the legs, use a cushion; for example, for pain in the legs.
So that's what they call "gout" in their language! 😜
And if the patient has scrofulous humors that are caused by their body, then they should be treated.
When there are conditions that require you to apply cautery on the body, use a blunt instrument to remove them.
And it is better to be cautious than to have a bloodletting in the vein or nerve.
Translation: And when there are sharp pains in the joints, or the humor in the feet needs to be drawn out, it is called a "spatum" by doctors. When blood is released from an injury.
This translates to **"And if it is necessary, do [something] by the heat of the fire."**
Then find out if those are the other causes such as the ones that cause scrofulous.
And if it is a large vein, they say that they should not cut it. The patient should be treated as if there is a cushion on their legs to prevent pain.
Then apply your hand to the area already affected by gout, which will help you to heal the wound.
And if you treat the disease in the legs, it should be treated with poultices to draw out the pus from the two sores.
Mays a cushion be placed on the affected leg to treat their ailment.
When the disease is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, as described by the physician, it is called scrophulas.
and for the rest of the body, apply cautery in other parts as needed. And when the patient's groin and legs are healed, then apply the other poultice to their affected parts.
Chapter 43.
When you cut into the patient's leg, they are already being treated for the illness that affects the legs.
Our ancestors called this condition gout, and it is characterized by pain in the joints.
And this is the way to treat the illness caused by these things.
Then apply the hot poultice to his body and a cushion on their legs, and another cushion under their chest, so that the patient's skin will be treated with warmth.
Use cushions to protect the burn from further damage.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize someone's legs, apply your hand on the area that is affected by the problem called gout.
And if the doctor does not know what caused the pain, he will cover it with his hand to prevent further harm.
Then return the cushion or a piece of wood to their hand, so that it no longer appears outside the body.
And leave it covered for a while.
And if it is necessary to make an incision for the plague, the other treatment is the removal of sores from the patient's legs.
And they have administered medicines to the patient's legs and elsewhere on the body where necessary.
The original text is a medieval Latin medical text, but here's a potential interpretation based on the context you provided:
Then let the plague be left to fester until it heals.
Then I saw the patient's skin and treated them with cautery.
Therefore, we must say that the patient has been healed when the pain is gone, and it is customary for doctors to call it another illness.
And if you are treating a patient for gout, they will be cured after a few days, provided the cushion is placed correctly.
And now I say that there is no fear in the treatment of the groin.
Chapter 44.
A hernia on the legs is called a "hernia" by doctors.
And put your hand on the throat of the patient, to protect them from the pain.
These are the two types of pain: natural and accidental.
And if you wish to make healing more likely, apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
The patient's condition is similar to how physicians used to describe gout. Then, if the pain is on their feet, they should be cauterized with a tool other than a knife. And if you are a doctor, you will know what to do when there's a pain in the thighs that needs further investigation.
This is Latin for "Chapter 45."
On the treatment of various swellings.
From the swelling in the joints, you can tell what kind of inflammation they have.
This is a tricky one!  It seems like the text is trying to describe how a specific medical procedure works.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the intestine if it is inflamed.
And if there is no heat in the legs, it means they are not suffering from gout; but rather from something else.
And if it is a large swelling, then apply cautery to the affected area to reduce it.
Therefore, when you treat a swelling in the leg, you must first identify its cause.
This means that this is a description of how to treat something by applying cushions to the patient's body.
And apply a bandage to the affected area, considering what its color might be.
And if it's necessary to cut into the flesh, the same rules apply.
Then reduce the swelling in the body with a cautery.
This is the meaning of the first part of the sentence: "And if it's necessary to make a cushion for the intestine in this way". And so the doctor should apply a cushion to the swelling on the patient's legs.
And if it's necessary to break the skin for treatment, then do so carefully.
If there's an imbalance of the humors, one way or another, it will return to the foot.
And if some part of the body needs to be cauterized, you will then cauterize an area on the foot.
When the disease is severe, and if it is necessary to draw blood from the body, the intestine will be allowed to dry up in the open.
And if it is a question of the intestines or of the bowels, let it be treated with a cushion on the body.
This looks like you're asking for a translation of a text that likely describes a medical procedure in a fictional language based on its resemblance to medical terms.
Of the instruments necessary for surgery, the first are those used for cutting and incision.
From these three symptoms, the patient will be treated for gout.
Then if you are translating "And if it is necessary to make points" correctly, it should be:
And if it is necessary to be burned by the fire of a cautery.
It appears that the patient's pain can be relieved by having another person apply pressure to their legs and feet.
And if the body’s humors are causing pain in one's joints, a hot iron should be used to cauterize them.
And if it is the feet, they are great in number, but little understood.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
La forma de experient (the way to experience) the pain in their feet.
Another person's legs are used to describe the pain of another.
The patient's leg will be healed by applying cushions to the area.
Then apply needles to their legs and arms to remove excess fluids and place another cushion on their chest for protection.
And if you are treating someone for a fistula, they will be in great pain, so use a cushion to support them.
Gynecological issues are often treated by applying hot compresses to the affected area.
The form of the lead-based poultice
Lead cauterization.
When swelling occurs in the joints: E should be applied to the affected area.
The forms of the nails are diverse, some being straight and others having a special shape.
And in the case of the foot, there are three types of pain.
These are the curves or bends from which the body has two, just give them a little bit of space between them and put them back in their place.
Et autre, which means "And another" in both Occitan and French. It describes the patient's body being affected by three conditions:
And all these are necessary for a doctor to be aware of.
The text describes a treatment method for a medical condition.
Autre le dit aless le 4th having two cushions. It is customary for a physician to apply a pointed cautery to the affected area. And if the patient has a slight swelling in their legs, it is called edema.
And so it is done in the form of a crescent moon having three curves.
Forma of a form of a doctor having three parts of the body to be treated by a surgeon.
These are the ways to treat nodes and abscesses.
When translated into English, this text would read:
Forma del s'caut el body to its natural place.
The shape of the instrument used for cutting is a key factor in gout.
For a disease that affects the body by a specific cause, such as an injury, doctors may use a variety of methods for treatment.
And this is what causes the three forms of gout: head, veins, and gut.
Then apply a hot iron to the area where the pain occurs in the feet and they are treated with a poultice.
And if you want to make a point on the foot, then do so on their legs (or elsewhere) as needed.
The forms of the body's ailments are already known, and they are called gout in the legs, or the feet. And then put your hand on their thighs, etc.
There are three types of bloodletting using cups: great cupping, medium cupping, and minor cupping.
And they are to be cauterized with a hot iron if necessary, as it prevents further complications.
These are some types of cupping therapy, but the exact meaning depends on the context.
The first sentence describes the use of a cautery for treating gout, but the meaning is unclear due to the unfamiliar language used.
And if you placed a cushion on the patient's legs or feet, it would be considered a sign that they are being treated by the other for those conditions.
"And if it is necessary that the affected area be cauterized, place your hand on their legs and apply it to the chest."
The doctors say that the pain in the feet, which is called gout by them, is caused by an excess of cold humors.
Then apply the ointment to the patient's chest, for they are assembled from the breasts.
Some people say that some homes are already swollen with inflammation.
But if you need to mark the body with plague marks, then use a sharp tool.
Then, if it is caused by a wound being in two parts, apply a cushion to the wound under the leg.
E so if it's a cushion, apply it to the area between the legs, or wherever it hurts.
Chapter 48.
A hot poker should be used to drain the pus from the wound.
And if a patient has a boil between their legs, then call upon one of the many physicians who are skilled in treating such things.
And you must apply a cushion to the legs; for if he has a cushion in his hand, then the leg will be hurt, which is what the patient needs.
And on their legs, apply the appropriate salve to heal them.
When a physician sees a swelling in the affected area, they know it is a boil.
And if the plague is spreading throughout the body, apply cautery as we previously discussed.
Gout is a disease characterized by pain in the joints caused by the accumulation of bad humors.
This sentence likely refers to the treatment of boils or abscesses using cauterization techniques.
And if the patient has a sharp pain, which is known to be caused by humors being out of balance.
When pain occurs in the chest, it is recognized as gout on their body.
And if it is caused by excess humors in the body, it is best to avoid cauterization.
Then cut it in the thigh area with an instrument that cuts into the flesh, to prevent the disease from spreading.
The other way to say it is that the patient has been diagnosed with a disease affecting the whole body, but especially the bowels, which are affected by two types of pain — one in the bowels, and the other affecting the feet.
When you cauterize the area between the legs, you must be careful.
And if it is necessary to cure the patient, another application of treatment is needed.
E tu, who has been afflicted by a painful swelling that affects the lower limb, which you are to treat by making a cautery on their foot with a cushion.
And if you have to lance the boils, do so by first making an incision.
And so you cauterize the abscess in their foot, and another you place on the patient's legs to prevent them from spreading, while keeping the other leg covered.
Then place the cushion on their legs and feet.
This is where the physician's knowledge is needed to properly treat a swelling caused by a twisted nerve.
And so too when an abscess occurs in a vein or artery, treat it accordingly.
And if it is caused by the pain in the joints, you should place a cushion on their feet, and another wherever the patient's intestines or hernia are affected, and the other upon them.
And if one has a case of gout, it is said that the pain is in the legs, etc.
And if you are going to cauterize the intestine, it should be done carefully so as not to affect the whole body, but only on the affected area, and the rest of the body should be left alone.
Therefore, you should apply cautery to the area where the patient's legs are being treated.
And for those who are suffering from an ailment, they will use a cauteri to treat them. Mays is the appropriate name for "gout" in this context.
And if it is a pain in the foot, apply a cautery to their legs; for the other one will be healed.
Chapter 51.
The first source sentence means:  "Then a burning sensation occurs in the abdomen."
Then they call it a case of gout if someone has an attack in their stomach or feet.
And they are two things that are different from each other, but these are: they have a cushion between them, and they are two parts of the body, one being the legs and the other the chest.
And if they are experiencing pain, and then apply cautery to their legs or other areas.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs, they should be made carefully and only when needed.
And if they are swollen, you should cauterize them, but only if necessary for their health.
And if you apply it to a patient with gout, leave it for two days.
Eser necesario de los ajuster la piel en su lugar, y no dejar que la piel se estire.
Mays si theil es when there is a sharp pain in the gut, then there is a cause for concern.
It is possible that they are in pain due to the disease of gout.
Then apply a poultice or other remedies to the legs and heal the patient's feet.
Then bring down your gaze on their arms, hold the cushion on their legs, and don't let them touch the wound.
And then you should make an incision on the affected leg.
This sentence appears to be from a language similar to Italian or French, but with a distinctly older feel.
On the treatment of a swelling in the abdomen.
And so you see, there are many reasons for the intestine to be constricted, but one cause is often enough to explain the pain.
And another by a hot iron burn. And if the humors are being drawn out from the body by bloodletting, you should place a cushion on the affected area, to which I will return to the original language later in the text. If the patient's foot is being bled, put it back into its natural state and nothing else, just like this:
Mays the body be damp and the soul hidden from view, but if you open your veins for treatment, then the legs will be warmed by a cushion and the patient should be treated with a gentle hand.
And now if there is bloodletting, you must apply a poultice to the affected area and treat the patient for the pain in their legs.
When there are no more harmful substances to cause inflammation, you should apply a cushion if they have a boil near their limbs, and treat them accordingly with a cushion under the area where they feel pain, and use your hands to place another cushion on their body.
And if it is caused by an excess of humors, the body's fluids are congested.
This refers to a surgical procedure involving the placement of a cushion on the patient's chest.
And if it is on the foot, the doctor must make sure the intestine or legs are not heated by the cure you have, but rather kept cool by applying a cold compress to them.
And so apply the cautery to the affected area to burn the pain out.
You have already found the problem; apply your treatment to the affected area.
Mays if you have to apply those methods to your legs, then use a cushion.
And if you wish, apply a cauterizer to the patient's body in order to burn out the evil humors that are causing the pain.
Then you should treat the inflammation with medication and apply a hot poultice to the area.
Chapter 53
The translation for the phrase "de curacio" from the given context: **For treating a patient**
So, treat the patient with caution when using cauterization.
E dias que the ancients say that there are some who believe in its effectiveness for certain ailments.
When that pain is old, it is necessary to use a hot cautery on their legs, and when it is severe, it is necessary to apply a bandage above the affected area.
This sentence describes a scenario where someone is using a cautery to treat a patient during the process of bloodletting.
Then place a cushion under the patient's foot and perform the operation. Then let it bleed, but do not sever it completely, and use bloodletting tools only slightly on the limbs.
If someone has pain in their body that causes inflammation, which they are treating with cautery or other methods, the best way to treat it is with a poultice of hot herbs applied to the vein.
The Latin for "Capitol .liv." is "Capitolium."
On the treatment of dropsy.
Then apply remedies to their legs, such as a cushion for them in their body's water imbalance, and other remedies for the condition.
When someone puts a cushion on their legs and another under their feet, it's called something else.
The cushion is placed on the patient's body, but they are given no medicines.
If you have been doing too much surgery, you should rest your legs.
It is customary to place your hand on the patient's body when using cautery to stop the pain.
And to make sure you are treating the patient correctly, three days after the last time they were treated.
Then apply three fingers to the area of the liver, where the disease originates.
When blood flows into the legs, the pain will be relieved by applying heat to the area.
You have already applied a cautery to the patient's leg, so you should place a cushion on their chest to prevent the pain from spreading.
And when the foot is already inflamed and swollen, you will apply a cautery to that part of the body.
And then apply a cushion to their legs, hold it in place on their chest, etc. Place the cushion so that it supports the legs, preventing further pain for the patient. This sounds like a description of a treatment for a hernia (likely using a truss).
And if you are skilled in using an instrument, use it to treat the patient's legs, so they don't bleed too much.
And if it is necessary to make use of the body's natural heat, let it be known that it is called gout.
And apply the instrument to their [thighs], so that they are not exposed to the cold air coming from the air in the room.
And you apply a cushion to their legs for a few days on the spot where the pain is located.
And if you are treating them, but they need to be treated by heat, apply hot cauterization.
and if you cauterize a person's stomach, or put another way, place a hot iron on their body to cauterize it.
This is the 50th chapter.
And then apply a bandage to the legs, and protect them from further injury.
Some people say that this is caused by something being stuck in the foot, but let us put the intestine back in its place.
And if you are using a cautery, then place your hand on their head and hold it there.
And apply a poultice to the affected area.
And when they are ready to urinate, they will urinate in the presence of others, or on their thighs already put a cushion.
Then if a person's leg muscles are tense, it is customary to apply heat to them and another cushion on their foot.
Mays aquel del qual que le traus de cushion es used for a medical procedure.
And in those who are suffering from a disease where there is no proper place for the bladder to be, it is said that they should use a cushion to prevent the pain from being on the other parts of the body.
When the patient's body needs to be treated with a hot iron, the patient should be treated with leeches on their thighs to remove the cushion from under their left leg.
And if you are a doctor, be careful when performing bloodletting; don't let it turn into plague.
**Capitol .lvi.**
The foreskin should be treated for its whiteness due to excessive humors.
This means that when there is pain in the legs or feet, it is sometimes referred to as gout by doctors.
And from that one (the patient) there is a malignant humor and another humor.
No malignant ailment that affects the whole body should be called gout.
And if he has a malignant tumor, it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
And if the condition is not on the outside, but rather inside the foreskin, then you must apply the cautery there, to the part that is affected.
Then you, doctor, are to place your hand over the body to prevent the patient from being harmed by the use of the cautery.
And if you are treating that ailment, then apply heat to the legs within its natural bounds.
This means that if the patient's blood is affected by the moon, they should be given lunar remedies.
And if there are two or more cushions under them.
And if you already have a cushion placed under the patient's thighs, and put another on their legs, to prevent the urine from flowing freely.
Then apply a poultice to the legs of the patient, and do not cauterize them with a sharp cautery unless necessary; if you must use a sharp cautery, use it on the foot only.
Then you must cauterize the patient's affected area to prevent any further complications.
Then use a tool to separate the skin between their legs, and carefully hold it open with your hand so that the patient’s penis doesn't protrude from the foreskin.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area and use a bandage to bind it.
Another hand should be placed on their chest, to prevent them from scratching at the affected area.
Then return the patient's legs to their circumcision and apply a cushion to them.
When it comes to the operation on the legs, it is customary for them to be called "pulsating" or "trembling" by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make an incision in the skin, they would use a lancet.
The text you provided seems to be a mix of languages and doesn't follow standard grammar rules of any of them. This makes it difficult to translate accurately without more context. However, based on the fragments I see, this might be a description of how a physician would treat a patient with gout: Another name for the illness affecting the limbs was placed on the body by the use of cauterization.
And in surgery, you should put your hand on their legs to keep them from being burned. The child's body is naturally prone to coldness, so use a cushion for their treatment.
And if you wish to help the patient's joints in the area where the pain is felt, then use cauterization, which is applied with a pointed tool, on the legs and thighs; there should be no pain remaining.
The next day, treat the child with the appropriate remedies for gout.
And if you don’t understand, the intestine is inflamed by the physician. And he puts his hands on the other side, in order to make it a little less painful for himself.
And then you have to cauterize the wound where the patient's body is cleansed.
This is the modified form of the shape.
Let the other be that which is not called by the name of gout, but is caused by an imbalance in the humors.
When the error is in the body, you must completely remove the problem from their cavity.
Then you should apply heat to the area where there are no signs of inflammation or infection.
Then treat the affected area in a similar way to how you would treat a wound on the foot.
After three days, apply the cautery to the affected area if the pain has not subsided.
And so if you are treating a patient, be careful to avoid applying heat to the head.
And therefore the treatment for it will be discussed in the treatise on the plague.
And if you are subject to the plague, and have been ill for some time, then apply this remedy.
And if you are caring for the patient's health, they should be treated to prevent them from suffering further.
This passage is in English, but uses words that are similar across Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French for "doctor," "sick" or "illness" and "another cushion under their chest."
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Gout is likened to a blockage in the body's pathways.
Then use a needle to draw out the cause of the illness from the patient's body using an instrument called a lancet, which for this purpose is made of silver, and we will apply this method carefully with the cushion on the patient's legs.
And if you put a cushion under their hands, they will be able to urinate and have no more pain.
And so you should cauterize the affected area, using a cushion to protect the body from the heat.
Then place a cushion on the patient's body and apply it to their belly, where the doctors would treat the affected area.
And if the body is allowed to heal properly, then it will heal itself.
Then apply a cautery to that area for a cure, and use another for evacuating the bladder through urine.
Chapter 59
For the bladder to be healthy, you must use appropriate methods to treat its ailments.
And so you must apply a cautery to the affected area if it be necessary.
When there are no cushions under the legs of the patient, then they must be made clear that there should be no pain in the knees. And in that way, two are for the legs, and the other is for the feet.
At the beginning, place a cushion on the legs, which are in a state of being affected by humors, and apply heat to them as needed.
When using a hot compress, apply it to the affected area, which is the foot, and if it's necessary to use a poultice or other methods, it is customary to call this gout in the medical context.
Then apply the cauteri to the patient's legs if necessary; otherwise, apply it elsewhere on the body.
This is a medical text describing how a doctor might diagnose a patient's condition based on the location of pain in their body.
And if it is made of silver or of brass, the other one is used for the foot, and it's important to help a person in pain by using your hand on them.
And so you should apply a cushion to their legs and a bandage to hold it in place.
And then apply it to the legs.
And then apply a cushion to the bladder, so that the other humors do not descend there.
And if you want to stop the flow of humors, you place a poultice on the patient's body which are already in use for the swelling and pain that often occurs in the foot.
Then apply a cauterizing agent to the affected area to relieve pain.
The sixth sentence is in Latin: "Then, if you have a burning sensation in the legs."
Peys
We have already spoken about the types of treatments for the various types of diseases affecting the intestines and bladder.
And if they are severely ill, place cushions on their legs and feet.
And if there are stones in the bladder, they will be found by the physician.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient, here are the instructions for doing so.
Apeuza le cushion on la sua leg forz e que le beyes es dressat to prevent the infiltration from spreading.
And then apply poultices to the children's feet and keep them warm. May this be a sign that the first person to speak up will be the one who gets their wish granted.
And if there are many humors that are too large, another solution to the problem would be necessary.
It is customary to call gout by doctors when pain affects the intestines or feet.
And then place your hand on the affected area to help them.
And if you have an open wound, it is covered by your hand so that the patient does not feel pain.
E aprop has already placed a cushion in the other part of the body to prevent inflammation from spreading further.
Then place the cushion on their legs, and another on their feet.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the left side, place it so that it does not touch the intestine. And if he is a servant who has been placed in the cavity, he should be treated gently. And you slowly bring the patient's foot back into place.
Then apply pressure to that area, which is where the patient is supposed to hold their hands.
And command that they be cauterized by placing the instrument on their arm; if the pain is in another part of the body, place a bandage on it.
And so if the pain in the legs or joints is severe, this is how you would treat it. Then apply heat to the area according to the severity of the illness.
And it is customary for doctors to say that the patient has a problem in their legs or feet, because they are the ones who have suffered from it.
And from that place already mentioned the doctors are accustomed to apply their treatment.
Then you have your hand on their legs, put your hand in the proper place.
For doctors who are skilled in medicine, they may use tools to treat the patient with these skills.
If you cannot cure it with remedies, then use a strong acid to cauterize it.
This is a description of how to use cauterization for treating gout in the feet.
When there is a great deal of pain, it is customary for the physician to know what causes it, but sometimes they don't know which of these two things is causing it:  if the pain is caused by an excess of humors in the body, they should be careful not to let it become too intense or frequent.
And use forceps to remove the diseased part of the body if necessary.
Therefore, after completing the operation, apply aloeswood and dragon's blood to the wound. And apply a cloth to the place where the inflammation is present for the patient's benefit.
Then you have already applied a cautery to the affected area by the third day.
And so when the patient has been cut off from their pain, the wound should be treated with a cushion and the patient's feet held firmly by the physician and others.
And when the inflammation of the body is caused by the pain of a cushion placed under their legs, they are to be treated with a cautery applied to the area, and a poultice of hot herbs should be used to draw out the blood.
And apply heat to the whole body of the patient.
You have already applied the proper treatment to a patient's legs, etc.
And if it's a small stone that needs to be removed, place a cushion under them, so the patient doesn't feel pain from the removal.
When you have to treat a patient for a condition caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
Then bring them (the cushion) to the patient's legs, so that the intestines are no longer exposed.
...and placed a cushion on their legs, placing it under the cushions of the patient's feet... And then you must carefully remove the cushion from their body, and let the other part of the body be treated by another physician.
The first part translates to "And if you have to cauterize someone, place a cushion on their feet, and hold the cushion in place with another hand."
And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the foot, then use it for all the other ailments. And here comes (the person who) is in charge of their body. And from there, hold their hands above the knee. Then treat the patient's feet with a special kind of cautery to help them heal.
And when he has opened the intestine, so that it is not constricted by the bandage.
And if there are cushions on his legs, he has to pay attention to the cushion above.
And then apply cautery to the affected area.
Another common treatment for pain in the legs is bloodletting.
This translates to "When gout appears in the legs".
Gout is cured by keeping the patient's legs warm.
The woman is suffering from a severe pain in her legs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or their surrounding areas, it is important to know that it's done by skilled people.
And if you know how to perform this operation, it is best to do so gently.
And the fourth condition is that if there are indigestible stones, they are removed from the place where the pain was felt.
And when there is pain caused by the need for it to be used.
When doctors cannot cure the patient, they need to be careful how they speak about their condition.
And if the woman is afflicted with the disease called gout.
Therefore, if there is no pain in the legs, it is said to be caused by other factors.
If they are not a virgin, they will use another method for treatment.
Then apply a cushion on the patient's feet.
Then, in order to relieve them, apply your hand to the wound.
If the patient's condition is such that they are injured by hot, cold, or wet humors.
And he knows that the stone is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors.
And thus you know that you should apply heat to the affected area.
And if blood flows freely from a wound, apply a bandage to the affected area and keep the other leg warm.
And so they say that he who has the instruments for the operation should be careful to use them correctly in the extraction.
And if blood flows, and you know that the cause of the ailment is from the circulation of bad blood, then you will put a poultice on the wound, for that is how one treats it. Then return the patient's feet to their proper place.
Then apply a cushion to their leg or foot, as needed.
A cushion is placed under the affected area.
Then another cushion under their legs, and another on their feet, as well as on the body they are to be placed upon the patient's body.
Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the white humor which is what causes the pain to be felt in the groin, thighs, or other areas of the body, but only if the patient has a specific condition.
And another name for this condition is gout.
And put a cushion on the chest, as is necessary for its weakening.
And thus the patient's body should be treated, if it is already being affected by the humors, with a certain type of cushion.
Then apply a poultice to their feet and other areas where inflammation occurs.
And if it affects the patient's own body, then it is considered true rheumatism.
And if the doctors are treating the body for moisture.
And if you want to know the location of the pain, then judge by the color of the humors, the redness of which indicates its presence.
And if it is commanded to make points on the patient's body, they are burned with a hot iron.
And if you need to place a cushion on their body, et cetera.
And another on their left side, and commands that a second cushion be placed on the right side of them, to prevent the patient from being injured.
Then apply the hot iron to the patient's feet.
Make a section on the patient's thigh, carefully cauterize the vein, another section on their foot, and then cauterize the other veins.
You have already opened the way to treat the disease by removing the excess humors from the body.
And the patient's feet will be held in place by the physician.
And in this manner, separate the intestine between two thighs so that the patient can be treated with a cushion. And if pain lingers in the legs or an excess of fluids, the patient will be treated with a lancet.
Mays is translated to "then" in English.
Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
That is the way to apply a cushion for their comfort.
Then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar to draw out the excess humors.
Then treat the legs with a cushion of wool for their pain.
Then you are ready to apply a cautery on their legs. And if it is necessary to make marks on the legs, then it is the Greek way.
When the intestine is inflamed, it requires treatment with a poultice.
When the foot needs to be cauterized, use a gentle touch when applying the needle and carefully place the cushion under the patient's foot so as to protect all surrounding tissue.
And if it is known that the patient has a lot of blood in their intestine, it is pus-related.
Then you must do a proper cauterization to avoid pain.
This phrase describes gout as a painful condition that doctors often use a pointed cautery to treat.
Therefore, if you are treating a wound, it is also customary to apply another bandage over the affected area.
And so has the patient's wound been opened wide, and then apply a poultice to it.
And if it is necessary to pause the intestines for a while, they will be relieved by a cushion. And so you would have another place the cushion under his legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
For the first time in its entirety, the text says: "Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, and precede the intestine with a cushion."
This means that the patient's body should be positioned so the pain will be gone.
Capitol 63.
To cut open a hernia and perform surgery on it; to heal the body by cauterization.
This text describes the use of a poultice for treating a hernia, which is a condition where an organ or tissue protrudes through a weak spot in the muscle wall.
And if he/she needs to be cauterized, the cushion will help.
Then treat the affected area with a cautery to prevent the swelling.
And if there are other things wrong with the body, a poultice will be applied to them.
E for the patient's body it is a good sign.
And sometimes they will diagnose the patient's condition based on swelling in the feet or legs.
When your body is affected by inflammation in the veins, you must apply a cushion to the skin so that it doesn't spread.
When blood vessels swell up from cold humors, you must apply a bandage to the affected area.
E if it is necessary to make a mark on the legs, make one below the knee and apply a poultice.
Therefore, you should hold the patient's body in place while they are being treated for gout.
And if there is an adhesion in the intestine, then apply another cautery to the patient's thighs, which will be used to treat them.
When there are many conditions that cause pain in the bowels, it is customary to treat them with a cushion behind the patient's thighs and another on their feet, as we have previously stated.
Then since you have treated the patient's thighs, the cushion will be covered with wool and another treatment should be applied.
Capitol .lxiv.  translates to **Chapter 64**.
This is the treatment for a type of ailment in the legs which is called "hernia".
The physician should apply heat to the abdomen to soften the inflammation if there is pain in the legs caused by the ailment.
The cure for this disease is done for fear that the patient might remember.
But the patient must be healed by the surgeon.
And if you are to apply a bandage on their limbs, place it in its proper position.
Then you have already opened the vein, which is the way to treat it.
Then apply the cautery to the area of the affected joint.
This sentence describes a medical procedure using a needle and cushions, suggesting a treatment for a specific type of pain in the foot and possibly an indication of gout's nature. And if the patient complains of pain in their joints, which you have already cut open.
Then treat the other ailments in the same way, using cauterization to address the underlying cause.
And when joint pain is caused by cold humors that affect the testicles, it is called gout.
et autre do use laus (and) other things in the cavity of the body
Then apply a cushion on the abdomen and keep the affected area covered.
This refers to a rupture in the abdomen causing abdominal pain, and instructs on how to treat the condition.
This pain is caused by the following things: an imbalance of the humors in the legs or something else.
When treating the foot for swelling, the pain will come gradually and subside slowly.
And the sign of it is when the pain suddenly appears in the foot or toes.
And then it is said to be a type of hernia that affects the intestines.
E in some cases, it's called "the evil" and causes pain in the feet, and when the body is pressed, it becomes painful.
Then return to the patient's legs.
And if you place the cushion on their legs, the patient's legs are placed in a position to be treated by a cautery.
You may have already placed the cushion on their lap; then do so on their incision and two testicles.
E si' l'afeble in lo uos del medec, and so.
Then, if the patient has already been diagnosed with a cushion on their legs, the pain may be caused by a different kind of ailment.
When the testicles are affected, and pain is felt in the joints and legs, the doctor will say that it is gout if the pain is caused by a particular type of humors.
And if there’s a cushion under the hand, it means they are suffering from a left-sided hernia.
E cerqua am called by the other sources that are in the cavity of the body. If you find that there is a cause for pain in the abdomen, the patient likely has a stomach ache.
You placed a cushion on the area where you would use a cushion for the patient's legs.
And let him put a cushion under his feet;
Apply hot poultices to the affected area, as described above.
Then apply heat to the area where the intestines are, which would be the cavity, but don't let the patient overheat.
"And if the patient's intestine or other ailment requires opening, I should be careful to avoid the use of the cauterizer."
Then describe the patient's condition in detail as if they were a tapestry or fabric piece.
And then the patient's pain was addressed by the doctor using fire as a treatment method.
Then treat the first line of the patient's body (the cushion) to prevent the swelling from spreading further.
And cure the plague according to how we have said, until the patient is healed.
This sentence looks like it's from a text that was written in a medieval language that uses "Chapter" to denote sections.
You have already placed a cushion under them.
When there are pains in the legs, then make a point on the knees, as we have previously mentioned.
Then apply heat to the affected area only if necessary.
When the foot pain is prolonged, the cushion should be placed under it.
This practice, which is the treatment for this ailment, is typically called "the cure of the legs".
And sometimes the illness is cured by burning the skin in three places.
And then apply a cushion to the patient's body.
Translation 4: You have already opened the space between them, et autre on their chest, and you can close it again with a bandage.
And now adjust the two parts of the body to be healed by the use of cauterization, if necessary.
And if you need to remove the intestine from the body, use a cloth or your hand to prevent the patient's leg pain from worsening.
For the cure of the plague is to be done by cauterization.
And so the patient will be healed in this place.
Capitol .lxviii. describes the treatment of gout in the context of a doctor treating a patient's condition.
And thus they would be softened and calmed.
And if the skin is inflamed and red, you can be sure it's a case of hot, burning pain.
When the pain subsides, the patient should be given medicine to heal the wound.
And apply a cauterization to their legs, and another on their foot.
And a cushion should be placed under them, tending to their wounds.
Another (and likely incorrect) example of a possible translation of the title could be: "Chapter 69".
Concerning castration.
And so that's how we treat the patient for the disease they have in the body.
Castration can be done by either attrition or incision.
This is the way to cure the illness caused by cold humors. Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
When performing surgery to repair a tear or incision, you should ensure that the surgeon has a clear view of the area by removing the bone fragments from the joint.
And if there are problems in the legs, then apply a bandage to help them.
Then cauterize the area near the thighs, as needed. And do not allow anything to cause a cushion to be placed on their legs because they need to be treated for something more delicate than a simple ailment.
This is the way to castrate animals, because it is easier to remove the cushion if the animal is in pain.
Then apply the appropriate treatment for the plague.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
In men, the pain of the disease is felt in the intestines and bowels.
And if it is necessary to treat an ailment in the testicles, it can be done by applying other methods.
In the context of medieval medical treatises, this sentence means:  When there is a blockage in the intestines or a swelling of the testicles, it is customary to treat them with a cushion.
There are three types of treatment: for men, for women, and for those who have different ailments. Cove es that the patient's condition is gout.
And as for those men who have a second type of hernia, they are to be treated with a hot poultice.
Chapter .xxi.
The pain in the legs and feet can be caused by a condition called gout.
And sometimes the intestines of women are affected by this disease.
And then, if you are suffering from a pain in the legs, apply a cautery to the other part.
Then apply the cautery to the rest of the body, preventing the blood from flowing freely.
And if the patient is suffering from a disease that causes the foot to be healed.
And if we are to treat a person's flesh as in the case of the plague, it should be called "coa"
E aprop lo.cxxii.
Another method for treating the foot to prevent further complications
Then, for a woman, a small hole or wound should be made on the chest. And so it is, whether natural or accidental.
And it is caused by imbalances in the body, it causes pain in the feet.
You must hold the patient's legs, or put a cushion under them, or they will be infected by other puss.
And if the physician deems it necessary, he will apply a cautery to the area between the legs, which is what he does when the pain is caused by cold humors in the body.
When fever is present and there is pain in the legs, then apply cautery to the affected area.
And do not put a cushion on your face for fear of harming yourself, but if you need to apply one, then put it on your legs and not on your lips.
The patient's body should be treated with a hot cushion if their pain is caused by cold humors in the legs.
And then apply oil to the area or place a cushion on the leg where the incision is made by the surgeon's tools.
And if the cushion is thick enough, it is necessary to use a sharp knife for the incision.
The doctor will be able to tell you if your illness is caused by bad blood.
Then apply a poultice on their body to stop the bleeding, and heat the affected area with a hot iron.
And place a narrow cushion on their legs for comfort.
And if they have pain in their legs, administer a cushion under them, and let the other be placed on their feet.
And you will treat them with healing poultices to help heal the illness.
And when the pain is in the legs, cauterize to remove the humors causing the pain. When it's necessary to apply a poultice to the legs, they are treated as the other joint pain.
The chapter was titled after the affected body part by doctors to be treated as gout.
Treat the inflamed veins (hemorrhoids) with a cushion.
The following text is a guess at the translation, based on my understanding of the original language:
And I have explained the types of illnesses that are caused by the cushion in the intestine, so I will now describe those that are caused by the other things that affect the body.
And when they are painful, they are best called emorroydal by the doctors.
Those who suffer from gout are those whose pain is felt in their legs and feet, as well as the other parts of the body.
And if you wish to treat the body with heat, and apply a cushion to their legs, then use a hot iron for the legs, and a cauterized needle for the rest of the body.
And then pulverize the blood with a tool called a cautery.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet for one hour before applying your hand upon them.
And if the bleeding persists, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs.
Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area and let it be applied by a skilled practitioner.
And if it is caused by a lack of proper balance in the body's humors, you are dealing with a case of true humoral imbalance, which is what doctors call gout.
Chapter 74.
The patient's pain is in the form of a puncture wound.
This refers to a variety of ailments that are all related to inflammation and pain in the joints and limbs. And if there are diseases in the foot, and another cushion on their thighs, and other cushions on their legs, apply cold compresses to the affected areas.
If a surgeon operates on a patient, they must be careful that the treatment for other ailments does not interfere with the surgical procedure.
When the first signs of an abscess appear, do not treat it with a hot cautery as you would a fever.
And in the case of the thighs being affected, you should place a poultice on them; if they are swollen, apply a cushion under them to reduce the swelling.
And so that if the midwife comes across an opening in the legs, she can use her instruments for those specific cases.
Then apply the heated instrument to the legs and feet of the woman. And you should place cushions on their legs to prevent them from being injured by any other instrument.
And if you are to treat a patient's leg pain, use a cautery on their legs.
And when there are blisters that appear on the feet, apply cold compresses and poultices to soothe them.
And if the leg is swollen, place a hot needle on the area to make the patient's legs less swollen; and place a cushion where the needle was, on their chest in the area of the heart.
When the patient has been treated by cauterizing their body with a hot iron, to remove the pain, and apply a poultice to their foot.
Then apply a bandage for two days to keep the humors in.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, apply it to their feet, using the long-lasting heat treatment of applying a cautery with hot water and fire.
And then one must be careful to keep the other parts of the body warm.
Capitol .lxxv. translates to **Chapter 75**.
That is the way to treat the living, as opposed to the unnatural state.
The midwife must hold the woman's body in a way that prevents her from being harmed by the use of cautery on the legs.
When you have opened the patient's body for those who are suffering from these signs, and they are in need of help, then place a cushion under their feet so that the excess humor does not flow out.
Then use another cushion under the patient's leg, and place the patient on their back with the other cushions.
And if a woman's body is affected by an illness, she should be treated carefully by a skilled physician.
And if you are treating them for gout, it should be treated properly by applying a cushion to their foot or leg, et cetera.
When the patient's body is weakened by nature, it is necessary to give them an egrecio cushion for the legs or feet, so that they can be healed from natural ailments, or else their humors will become unbalanced and cause illness.
And then apply the cauterizing tool to the patient's feet to stop them from being infiltrated by heat. When it is necessary to treat a woman's bloated stomach with cauterization.
Mays, in this case, be translated as "the month now belongs to the Christians"
And if it is necessary to treat a patient's thighs and nose, here's how you do it: apply compresses to the affected areas, which should be done with a cushion for the first hour.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, use a gentle hand to reduce the swelling. When there is pain in the leg, use a hot cautery to treat it.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area and use your hand to push the intestine back in.
When the foot swells, apply a bandage to hold the foot in its proper position, and place a cushion under the swollen area.
Then you should apply a cautery to the legs if they have an intestine which has been badly treated.
Then, if you haven't already done so, apply heat to the affected area.
And if you must cauterize the joint or legs, make sure the patient's body is warm. Then apply the treatment to the legs, so he can be healed.
E cum vezes that are located in the legs. And then apply a bandage to their feet.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area. And if you have to cauterize (or apply other treatments) on the legs or feet, then do so by placing them in a specific position.
Then apply a strong cautery to their legs, for if they cannot move them, they will be burned.
And so, if the ailment is in the foot, you should place a cushion under them to reduce the swelling.
Then apply the cautery to the legs and use another cushion for the gout. This midwife must hold the child's foot gently and return it to its natural position.
And when he has been placed on his body between his legs and arms, and another cushion beneath him.
Then command your companions to apply a cushion on their knees and place another one on the foot, and then tell them to stop there; let the patient rest on that side. The patient's foot was already being cauterized by another.
When treating gout in this manner, consider using a hot cautery for relief.
And if you have to treat the patient's feet with hot iron, use it when they are cold.
And if it be necessary to use cautery on the affected part, do so gently, because God wills it.
And then apply a cushion above their legs to prevent them from experiencing pain in the area of the knee. But if the patient's body has a nature that causes pain, it is called gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs or feet, it should be done with a cautery tool.
And if it is difficult to treat, apply a poultice and treat them carefully.
And if it is a woman who suffers from gout, she is treated with a special cautery.
Remembers that you are reminded that they can be formed from a medical perspective.
And some women suffer from the painful disease that is commonly called gout.
And if the patient's legs are opened for a hot bath or a poultice, then the cushion is placed on the body of the patient.
Capitol lxxvi.
And then when the foot is injured, you should treat them in the same way as the rest of the body.
Then consider using the methods we have just mentioned when treating it medically.
And if the woman suffers from humors, it is best to apply the cushion to her legs.
And if there is a rupture in the first place, one should apply a bandage to prevent further rupture.
And then you should apply a poultice to their affected area, and moisten the other parts with an ointment.
And if there is a need to make an incision, then place the woman's hand on the incision.
Then place cushions under their arms, or use his hands to hold the patient's pain.
And if there is a need to apply cauterization between the feet, then place a cushion on their feet, and another under them.
And if you are treating someone with pain in their joints and another pain between their left foot and right foot.
Then apply a cautery to the legs or use another tool if necessary to hold the intestine in place, while using the other tools for proper treatment.
And if the patient has pain in their legs, they should be treated by applying a cauterization to the affected area.
And if a portion of the body has been treated by them.
Therefore, if the patient's body is afflicted by the coldness which causes pain in the joints, then they are said to be suffering from the affliction called gout.
If the patient has an ailment in their body, they are called upon to be treated by doctors, e.g., pain.
And if it is necessary to make a point on the legs of the patient, then place a cushion under their feet.
Mays call it “the gout” in the same way that they use the term for other types of pain.
And treat them as nature dictates by using forceps to remove the offending humors.
And then, if the gout is caused by cold and dampness, apply a cushion to the area.
The doctor will soon be able to cut into the area in question.
If swelling in the legs occurs due to an excess of fluids, treat it with a cautery to draw out the fluid.
If the pain is in the foot, it is customary for doctors to apply cautery to the area where the leeches are applied.
If you've got an excess of humors in your body, you are said to have a "gout" in your foot.
"Turn the head on their side and place a cushion under their legs."
And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, then use a cautery to cause heat on the affected area. Then apply a poultice to soothe the patient's affected areas.
Then apply cautery to the area if needed, but always carefully consider the location.
When there are issues with swelling or hernias, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then burn the second toe, if necessary, with the second tool.
Then apply a poultice to their body, for the treatment we have described.
When it comes to other treatments, for example, you should apply heat to the legs and use remedies to address the condition.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to her legs, it is applied to the feet. You will apply a poultice to the patient's abdomen; and place a cushion on their legs.
And if there are many things that plague him, he will be treated by doctors for a long time, but the patient may still suffer from gout.
Then you have opened the space above their thigh, it is customary to call it an ailment of the leg or foot, if the pain is in the legs or feet, put another cushion on the other one.
Then they are ready to be called upon by the bones of the dead.
Et la motz es sempre stata in piace de sa plaga.
When you are in the cavity between the legs, they have already placed a cushion under the feet.
Then use a cushion to remove the blockage.
Then apply heat to the legs, not their knees.
This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs, which will be painful to them. And so the patient's body will be protected from harm, will have been cauterized, or treated by other methods, if the doctor deems it necessary to protect the intestines from coming out of the body, they can use a cushion.
The patient's body was being prepared for cauterization by placing cushions under their body and supporting them with two "fusts" (sticks) so they wouldn't feel pain during the procedure.
Then you will have two cushions on the patient's legs so that they can be closed.
Take its form, which is like a cushion, and place it on the foot.
And if you place forceps on the body, it is customary to use them for those who are sick. But perhaps the intestine is affected, but they have to be careful.
This text describes how to treat the body for gout. Then your hand should be used to apply pressure to the intestine, preventing further damage from the cushion by its own weight.
This refers to the patient's condition, but since I don't know what "vertitgat" means, I can only guess that it means "the way" or "the state of being affected by"
This is the form used by healers to treat patients who are suffering from gout.
The form of treatment for a large swelling in the leg is to apply a cushion to the area.
And if the patient's intestines are inflamed, it is customary for doctors to use a special tool called a *forcep* in such cases. When you are treating a patient with gout, use your hand to apply pressure to their feet.
The text describes a situation where a physician is using cauterization to treat an ailment.
Forma de unci having two spines.
If a patient has a spastic disease, they are treated by a doctor who knows how to use a cautery.
Apply a cauterizer to the legs of the patient.
When pain occurs in the joints, especially in the feet, it is called gout, and they are used to treat it.
And so you must apply cushions to the patient's legs and another to their feet, as needed.
And if it is necessary to treat their legs, they are treated with a hot iron.
And if the patient has a second cushion, put it on the patient's hands and legs.
And if you are unable to cure it, use a needle to draw blood from the affected area, but don't worry about it too much. These herbs or some of them should be submerged in water, and the patient's hands are placed upon them.
Then place a reed in the mouth of the mother to hold the other reeds.
Then put your hand on their leg to prevent them from feeling discomfort or pain.
and if it is necessary to apply a soothing treatment to the affected area, you should apply it gently, because the one who has gout is very sensitive. Before the disease of the foot was cauterized, they were easily treated.
And if the mouth has been treated by a physician, then apply a poultice or herbs for healing.
And if it is customary to treat joint pain in the leg muscles and put another cushion under the feet.
And when the gouty pain comes, it is customarily treated by applying leeches to the affected area.
Mays the patient be healed from the pain of their ailment, may they be cured.
When there is a blockage in the body that causes pain, it’s called colic.
When the doctor is ready to apply cauterization, he should place a cushion under the patient's feet.
And the inflammation of the blood vessels in their legs should be treated by placing a cushion on them, which is called gout.
And if they have a condition that causes them to be consumed by the fumes.
Place another cushion under the child if their legs are affected by the condition.
When there is pain in the joints of the limbs, one should use a cautery to burn them. Then treat the patient for the pain in their legs; on that side put the cushion, and another on the other side, to protect them from the sharp pain.
E aprop pause over the patient's bowels; you are cured if the pain is from a cold that has infiltrated the legs.
The other servant will hold their hands to prevent them from moving.
When the disease has reached the stage of hardening in the bowels or limbs, it is called for.
And for healing of the wounds which are infected.
And you have already placed cushions under the patient's legs, and on their chest, to hold them in place.
Then apply a cautery to the area of the wound.
When the body is affected by certain ailments, it is customary to use cautery on those parts.
E then they will be called for by the doctors' hands to stop the pain; e if you are sick.
When there are blisters in the intestines or bladder, they cause pain in the legs and feet.
This text describes a type of medical treatment where you would use a cushion to protect the area while treating the fistula.
When the hand is affected by the gout, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
If you don't feel the pain in the entire body, but only in the chest, then you should know that your cure depends on it being something else.
And then you must place a cushion under the legs to prevent them from swelling up.
Perhaps the intestine is referring to a body part affected by gout, but it's not clear from the text.
And in all those parts where there are ulcers or wounds, the other doctors say are due to a need for cooling.
And if it is expected that the pain in the body will be healed by means of fire, or hot cautery is used for this.
And if you have a cushion under your legs, it is because you are suffering from an ailment that causes pain in the joints.
Then apply heat to the patient's neck (the "neck" part) using a cautery in order to prevent the opening from closing.
If your intestines or other flesh are affected by gout, you should know that the treatment for that is to treat the pain in the cavity of the feet.
Then, however, you can use other remedies to heal them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the area of the fistula multiple times, then use a cushion under the patient's feet.
And if it's necessary to cure with cauterization the foot, which needs a bandage, then apply the cushion, etc.
And then if the illness spreads to the internal parts, it's necessary to use a tool to open the skin where the pain is, but avoid using a cautery on the patient's feet.
And let those who are skilled in these matters be consulted to determine the cause of the pain.
And if it's necessary to cauterize with hot humors, which are applied by a hot iron or other means.
And apply the remedy to the foot so that it doesn't get infected again.
And apply cauterization to the affected area; when the body's humors are controlled or cauterized, there will be no further outbreak.
If there is a pain in the feet, then you may have to apply cautery elsewhere on the body as well.
So if the pain is in the feet or legs, then apply the treatment to those areas.
Then treat them as a physician would with another person's affliction. Then apply a point to the exposed area, using the cushion as needed, and place another cushion on the exposed area.
And if the patient has a fit, place a cushion on their legs and apply heat to the affected area.
And if you wish to draw a distinction between the true and the false, you should know that there are other things that cause pain in the body besides the foot being affected by cold humors.
And if it be healed, another servant will cure it.
And if the fistula is open, keep it so, or you will cause more damage to the skin.
This is a description of how to treat a fistula, which is a small tunnel that connects two internal organs or a organ to the skin.
When hemorrhoids bleed.
And if you are using the word "other" to refer to the leg or foot, they say that the original meaning of "emorroidi" is used in the sense of "that which is needed for a procedure." Then you have a small and large, and they need to be treated differently.
And these are the causes of pain in the legs, which are called fluxes, which are caused by yellow humors or bile.
Then have the patient's legs and feet be treated with a hot cautery to prevent their bowels from being affected by the pain. And then you must cauterize the skin around the affected area, as well as the intestines.
Then, if you are cauterizing the joints to remove their humors or treat them with a poultice, you should use a cautery made of metal on the affected area, as described in this chapter. And another thing to be healed will be placed on the patient's arms.
Then you will have to apply a cautery to the patient's foot.
If your patient has pain in their joints, treat them as if they had a problem with their bowels, and apply pressure to the affected area with a cushion, just as you would use a bandage on a wound.
And for those who have a pain in their legs, use a surgical needle to make incisions.
Let a hot poultice be applied to all, and let them not have more than one, which is two, for the sake of the patient's health, applying a cushion to the affected area, while another person applies their hand.
And place another on the chest of the patient; but open the leg for the operation, or put an ointment upon it. And if the patient has a wound on their leg, cure that which can be cured.
And if the wound has become infected and the doctors say it cannot be healed, then they use a cautery to dry the area.
Then apply cauterization to the legs if necessary to heal those burns.
This sentence describes the use of a cautery to treat a condition affecting the feet, known as gota in the original language.
And then you should put your hand on them to prevent further injury.
The second intestine is in the following.
The rest of the world will think that this is a disease in the feet.
And then apply a heated poultice to their legs or feet to draw out the evil humors. Then use fire or medicinal treatment on the patient's legs, according to their condition, as well as on their feet.
If someone has a large amount of pain in their body, they are considered to be suffering from a disease called fistula.
And if you have already placed a cannula in your gut (or to prevent swelling), use that instead of a knife when dealing with the patient's pain.
And if you wish, make them use a cushion for their legs or feet.
Let the hand be placed above the patient's foot so that it is not pierced by the lancet.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, you should do so by using a pointed cautery.
And by the instruments of the physicians, you will apply the remedy for the ailment.
The text you provided appears to be in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, likely Catalan.
This sentence is likely describing the symptoms and treatment of gout in a medieval context.
The cairn should be placed in a specific position on the body.
Then apply to the patient's legs, where the leg pain is most severe, a hot iron treatment.
And if it is necessary to apply a bandage, it should be applied for a length of one hand's width on a patient suffering from the ailment.
And let the other be cauterized and treated so that it does not become inflamed.
Then apply the other two to the legs and the third to the foot.
Then apply a cushion to the affected joint, and place the cushion on their feet.
And if the medicine fails, another remedy is applied to the patient's legs, and it will be used for one whole night.
But if you are suffering from that pain, it's a sign of gout.
If you are experiencing pain due to a buildup of humors in your feet, these should be treated differently than other conditions that cause pain.
And then for the treatment of the plague.
You have already seen the patient's legs and feet.
The plague is caused by something that causes pain to the legs, and another by other things.
Orthodox physicians, or other similar healers, would be wise to heed this advice: Ointment should only be applied under a doctor's supervision.
Then apply a hot iron to the head or other part of the body to cause a burn, but only after the affected area has been heated with a different type of heat from the one that causes the burning.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg or foot muscles, use the appropriate tool for each.
The pain in the body will be treated at the beginning of the third chapter.
And if the pain is caused by a simple cause, or other ailments, then consider the following: if it's not a cautery that would be used to treat it, but a fleubotomia, lahors, are used for ailments of the chest.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery, place your hand on their abdomen, and use a hot cautery.
Then if you have pain in your legs, it is customary to call it by its proper name, which is gout.
And if a hot poultice is placed on the foot, apply it to the affected area, and another poultice on the patient's legs, which are already swollen.
If you are sure that it is necessary to apply heat to the area, then cauterize it immediately if the abscess is new, and place a cushion under the patient's recent one to prevent the wound from spreading.
And if you have already treated the patient, then rest assured their legs are no longer used for burning with a hot iron, e.g., if they have gout.
If the plague is severe or if there are many signs of disease on the legs, then they should be treated with cauterization.
And so you see, a plague has been discovered on their bones, they say, by doctors, who already know how to treat it, but for those who have it, there is no cure.
And if you are treating the body's humors, then apply your treatment to the skin, and use a cushion to support the body and avoid the pain spreading.
If you have to inquire about whether a patient has a fever or if the blood is flowing freely from the body, it means that the patient has an ailment in the blood vessels.
And if it's simple plagues, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then the patient's body must be treated with a poultice, and they should have their body burned with a cautery on the thighs, two cushions on the chest, and another one on the feet.
And if you have opened the patient's body to remove the bad humors, then don’t remove your hands from them while you are there.
Then have the doctor apply a poultice to the affected area, and use a cushion for support.
And then apply a hot iron to their veins to stop them from being altered or affected by the humors.
And if these are the affected areas, then apply the cushion to the body, apply the cautery to the other areas, and use a position that prevents the pain from worsening.
And if the patient's body experiences pain due to a fever, then you are treating them for a fever.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use the appropriate tools and methods.
When your hand touches the body.
If the plague affects the lower limbs, it is called gout in the first place.
This is a pain in the legs, which is what you might call a sharp pain or something similar to a burning sensation. Do not be afraid to use the cauterization technique on the patient, but only after carefully considering the cause of the ailment in the legs.
And if it is a wound that is healed by light medicines, it is treated with gentle washes, so it may heal well.
If the cushion is large, then you must hold your hand over it to control the flow.
Mays if to the pain in the legs the remedy is to apply a pointed cauterizing tool for relief.
And if the artery is already cut open, then apply another cushion on the foot, and so forth on the legs and another on their feet, and cauterize the artery as appropriate to prevent further bleeding.
The first line contains information about the process and its purpose, suggesting it might be a recipe for treating or managing a condition related to the body's natural state.
Mays if the illness is caused by an excess of cold humors, they are treated differently depending on whether or not the patient has gout.
And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the area. And if they have been afflicted with an ailment that has already caused them to be pierced by a fistula, it is necessary to apply a poultice to the area.
If there is pain in the legs or feet, and if it is severe, it is called sciatica.
And if there is no cure for their pain, the patient's legs may be treated with heat to prevent further spreading.
And you will see that if the other parts are treated with an ointment, the patient will find relief from the plague.
When there are three days or more since the onset of the plague, the rest of the body will be healed; then it is safe to use other remedies for the patient.
If treatment of the ailment is delayed, then the patient should be treated by applying heat to their legs and preventing them from experiencing a further influx of blood.
E if you are treating the pain of a person by incision, use a hot cautery.
When the foot is injured, it is customary to apply a poultice to the affected area and cushions on the legs and feet, as well as keeping the patient's attention focused elsewhere. If the plague has not yet spread, you should apply a hot iron to their joints.
And for other ailments, treatment can be done with the use of poultices.
And for plagues in the legs.
The patient's belly pain is great.
And if the foot is opened or a small incision made in it, it becomes difficult to return them to their place.
E siu la cushion of the other two sides.
And then you should know that there are four types of sutures in the body.
And then another servant on the abdomen, if necessary.
And you will have applied it to the patient's body in the process of cauterization.
And then I say that when the plague is caused by the legs, it is difficult to reduce it.
And so when a person has gout, it is customary to place cushions on their head and legs, and also place them on the legs, which are swollen, so that they will be heated by the fire of the cure.
When illness strikes the legs, it is better to apply cold treatment to the area than use hot cautery.
And so when the patient's inflammation is resolved, the patient needs to be monitored.
Then apply a cushion to his legs and use the other for treatment.
And the first treatment is to apply a cautery to prevent the spread of inflammation.
And if you are using the instrument on someone's legs, place their legs on the surface of the cushion.
Then, if the pain is in the foot, use another method to treat it.
And then, when the plague is aggravated, the doctors should carefully tend to the patient's body.
When there are many hernias in the body, it should be called an open sore, and if it's on the legs, they should be placed higher than the patient's waist.
When the intestines are affected by the disease, one should place your attention on the area where the pain is worst.
This line likely translates to instructions for treating gout in the body's joints.
When the pain is in the lower limbs, it is customary to place cushions there and apply a hot cautery to the patient's body, but it is important that a skilled physician be present for such a diagnosis.
E questa que es la forma de fer lo.
Then apply another cushion to the other side of the needle, and if necessary, you should place another cushion on their legs, and use a tool to remove the first one, so the patient should be careful about the cushions.
The agues (rheumatic fevers) are called by different names depending on their severity.
And if the pain is in the knees, they are to be treated as the other parts of the body are, meaning with the use of a cushion for support.
And for that there be no sutures allowed to close the wound.
And if you need to use needles on the leg for pain relief, place them on the legs of the one who has been affected by the plague and other ailments.
These are the types of wounds for which these stitches are used.
The second translation is for the patient's foot, the pain of which can be alleviated by applying a cauterizing tool to specific points on the foot.
Then the patient's legs are positioned below the needle, for in plague they are treated by the use of the cautery on the body to treat a condition similar to that which is caused by the four humors.
Then apply heat to the area of the affected joint.
Then this same pain on their legs is what causes gout in the foot.
And if their bladder was swollen or they had a pain in the chest, then they were already plagued by a plague that's in the chest.
The plague was healed in 15 days or so by the patient's condition.
And if it's necessary for the other doctors to use a poultice on the wound, place your hand on the patient's legs, and another on their chest, so that they have a cure for the pain.
And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of cushionings for wounds.
And you put a needle on their legs, separating them from each other.
And thus the whole body is considered to be healed by the use of a needle, as well as the thighs.
If there are joint pains caused by other factors, then apply heat to the area.
And if you are already familiar with the pain in the thighs which can be treated with this technique.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, use a different cautery on the opposite side, because the one used for the initial treatment is unsuitable for that part.
And so you cauterize the part of the body that needs it, for the sake of example.
And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin with a needle, in which case the patient's skin or another part of the body would be healed.
And if they are in need of treatment, let them be given proper care by those who know how to treat them.
You have already seen the patient's intestines are opened and they are suffering.
Then apply a cautery to their legs.
This method of stitching is better than the usual light stitching.
This is the treatment for the sick, who are suffering from pain in the legs.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the body, the doctor uses a pointed cautery to make an incision and then apply the hot irons to the affected area.
You already know that it is difficult to place a cushion on their legs, and if the patient has a condition in the lower abdomen, which you might call "other" conditions, then they are called "the other".
And then you must apply treatment for the illness of plague.
Then, if the cause is a pain in the legs from which the plague has come, apply heat to the affected area.
And if the patient suffers from other ailments than the cushion on their feet, they must be treated for them first.
The sentence describes the need to avoid unnecessary pain for patients by using a cushion under their feet during an outbreak of gout.
And if you fear that the plague will spread to other parts of the body, use a hot iron to cauterize them.
When gout affects the body, a symptom they see is pain in the legs that results from the accumulation of cold humors.
And it is lighter to heal the bowels that are already open than those hidden in the body.
Then apply a cautery to their body to cleanse them from the plague, but be careful that the cushion does not cause further harm.
Perhaps a new treatment for the plague was needed, which required a precise understanding of its nature.
When you are afflicted with pain in your legs or feet, use a poultice of herbs and spices to ease them.
And if it's necessary to apply a cautery on their legs, place them over the cushion already there.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area to prevent the pain from returning.
And if there are ruptures in the intestine or stomach, you can have them repaired with a cushion to prevent it from coming out.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if you find that a wound has been inflicted on a patient's leg, treat them with care to prevent further complications.
The second line translates to: "Then place a cushion under the patient's legs while they are still attached to the body"
And another place for the cushion, and no other!
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area and if pain in the foot arises, treat it with cautery.
This text appears to be a humorous attempt at writing in medieval language, likely using a combination of English words with a medieval flair.
Then treat with a method that uses ants.
If there's a fever that is widespread, it is known as the great plague, which is often fatal and rarely cured completely.
The text is in Latin.
If you know how to translate this passage, please provide me with the translation for comparison.
And if you are a real wound, and if there is a cushion for the patient's feet.
E in some men, the blood flows slowly through their arm. And sometimes this cushion is thick and warm on your knees.
When doctors use a tool to help them, they need to know how to treat it correctly.
And let me know if you want to know how to treat fistulas.
And if one wishes to avoid fistulas in all areas of the body, including the veins, arteries, and other parts of the body, then apply it (the remedy) to the area with a cushion placed on the affected part of the body.
And so, to treat such an abscess on the foot requires more than just ordinary methods.
If you are in need of medical treatment for an ailment, you may seek help from this practice.
Mays es que has de subtil, other words for the patient's ailment or condition are needed.
When there is a need to cauterize the fistula, you will place your hand over it.
Then apply a poultice to the other areas of the body where pain exists, such as the legs or feet, but first apply a bandage to the wound.
You have already mentioned that your work is about the treatment of wounds, which are also known as "gout" by physicians, but now you want to discuss a specific method for treating these ailments.
And now, when you have exposed the fistula.
Then return to the body that which has been opened by the other cushion.
And if it is a fistula of great distance, use a cushion to support the abdomen and thighs, and place another cushion on top of the first one, so that the patient's body will not be hurt by the heat.
And if the patient has an opening in their leg due to a wound, they will need a physician.
And if there are already cushions on their legs, they should be used for support.
Mays is a proper noun, so it is likely referring to something specific.
Then consider if the cause of the fistula is in the thigh or leg, for it is from the same place as the other two are located.
When the foot is affected, you must use a lancet to remove the excess fluid.
Then if there is no cure for the patient's sickness, you will be healed by a cushion, as well as the pain in the thighs being treated.
And if it is not cured, you must treat the cause of the pain in the body, which is a sign that it has not been treated properly.
And if the bone is affected by the corruption, then you use the fine forceps on the patient.
And if you must use a cushion on their legs, use it skillfully.
Then apply cauterization to their body, only if they are afraid of a hot burn.
Then you should apply pressure to the bone with your hand.
If you are suffering from pain in your legs, use a cushion to apply pressure to them, and an Egyptian poultice for the pain on their thighs, because the patient's leg muscles are prone to pain and require a poultice.
But if the disease attacks the legs or bones, it will be the same as that which corrupts the body.
When there is a disease in the legs or feet, it's necessary to apply a cautery on their body where the pain is located.
Then I will show you how to apply cauterization to a man's body.
Then place another one on the legs, and use the rest for the man's legs, and keep the other hand warm.
Then return to the patient's body, put your hands on those areas affected by the pain in their toes.
And then the doctor will apply heat to the affected area by applying a cauterizer.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the patient's body, they are treated as such by doctors.
And then apply a hot cushion to the person's body and use other tools for the treatment.
Then bring the patient's legs to their natural position, and another on their feet.
And then, the patient's pain was great in their legs, so that they were very sore.
And now, place a heated cautery on the already exposed joint.
Then I apply the cauterizer to the patient's legs and feet to prevent their pain from spreading.
And then you should place your hand over the affected area to prevent further complications.
And if a patient has pain in their legs, then apply cautery there.
And if there's no need to cauterize the intestine, don't perforate it.
And then the patient already has a cushion to put upon them, and another will be placed on the bed for the rest of the day, and their chest will be covered with a small cloth.
And it is not necessary to make a cushion for them in the operation of the operation of a cutting tool.
And so they will heal their condition, which becomes soft and fleshy; the treatment should be continued with the same, and the patient's legs kept warm to prevent the humors from hardening.
When there are pains in the legs, apply your hand to the affected area to use a cushion for support.
Then place it decently so that you don’t burn the flesh.
This sentence suggests that if someone has pain in their legs, the treatment should be to apply small heat packs to the area rather than letting the ailment fester.
If the disease has reached your feet, you must apply the cushion to the affected area.
And if there is an infection in the area, it will be treated with cautery.
And if the pain is in their foot, apply cautery to the place where the pain is located from other sources.
When there are pains in the legs, it is customary for doctors to call them gout.
Then return to the patient's body the cushion from their chest.
I have seen that the patient has pain in their legs and feet.
Then you will know which treatment is suitable for the patient's ailments because this art is very long and difficult to master, so if you want to use it, you need to be well-informed about its application.
And then you must place a cushion under the patient's feet to avoid complications, as well as between the thighs. And if it is a cushion, put it on their legs and other things.
This translates to:
Forma of a large vein or joint, and it's possible meaning is related to gout.
Forma de ray: If the patient has pain in their foot, apply heat to the affected area.
It is not appropriate to translate that literally.
A form of gout.
For a sharp pain in the razor, apply a poultice to the affected area.
When there is pain in the foot, one must treat it medically. When you burn the skin with a cautery, it is customary to apply it to the feet.
And if the foot is swollen or inflamed, then you should apply a poultice to their legs.
Here comes the second sentence:
This describes the form of a slightly different type of pain in the joints.
This appears to be a Latin phrase.
And so is the form of the minor incisors:
And if it is necessary to make incisions, the other incisions are made in the same way on the legs as they are on the arms.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
The first sentence is translated as: **"And the first (sentence) is triangular and sharp."**
And if it's caused by iron from India, it is treated similarly to how you would treat other conditions like those that cause pain in the legs and feet.
And place your hand on their legs to stop the spread of the pain.
Then return to the text:  The doctors are saying that if you have a body part that is not healed because of the coldness, it means that the person has been poisoned by a poisoner.
When there is a burn or injury in the body, it is called gout.
And similarly if it is caused by venomous humors it is called gout.
And if the wound in the finger is affected by heat, apply a bandage to protect it from infection while the patient has a fever.
And similar to how you open the space for the surgeon's operation, use a cautery for the burning that occurs from the inflammation.
Then you will place a cauterization instrument on the arm above the elbow.
And if there are other causes for the pain in the patient's body, then they should be treated according to those causes.
And similarly, if necessary, open it up with a cautery.
And place your hand on the foot to prevent pain. This translates to:
Then treat them with cauterization, for if the patient's legs are burned, the ailment will be fatal.
Then if you want to cut off a limb you should separate it from their connection with the body.
And if there are points to be made on the foot.
Mays it's if you apply heat to the affected area; if it works, the patient will feel relief from their symptoms.
And apply it to the affected area within that same patient's leg.
This is the first sentence translated from a language that looks like a combination of languages from Latin-derived Romance languages.
And then the inflammation in his foot, if it has been opened up by you, will be healed.
The patient is healing, and the cushions are placed on their legs and a cushion is held under them to prevent the pain from spreading out.
Lon gtemps has been placed on the thigh for the patient.
A cushion will also be placed on his hand, to contain the superfluity from the other parts of the body.
And if I have opened the space between the patient’s thighs, it must be closed again.
But since he has been cured by the doctor, he should be returned to his place.
This translation is an example of how a doctor might say that the patient's body is ready for the operation.
On their proper application when using medicines for purging.
And if it is necessary to apply a hot poultice to a member to treat it.
But perhaps if the disease is prolonged in the feet, it is called zukem.
Translation 1: And if it is necessary to make incisions on the foot, it should be done carefully so that the patient doesn't feel pain.
And then you apply an enema to the patient for their constipation, and put a cushion on their feet.
And then apply the poultice to the affected area.
Then apply your hand to his/her feet, and let them be treated with water for two hours.
And then apply heat to that area (the feet) using a medical instrument.
Then return the water to its place, and hold the patient's legs in place.
If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian treatment, then they are likely suffering from pain in their feet or legs.
And if there are other reasons for the pain in the legs, apply a suppository to bring out the bile.
And then you can apply a poultice on the patient's thighs, or use other remedies to stop the intestine from being swollen.
And if you want to use a cautery on the patient's body, be careful not to open the wound too wide, and place the canula upon them gently.
And if you put a poultice on the affected area.
And then if the pain is located in the arms of the patient, it is the elevated part of the body that is affected by the cushion.
Then prepare the arm with its remedies.
May the pain in the knee be relieved by a hot poultice. And so you should know if it is necessary to apply heat or cold to treat the ailment.
Then if you wish to consider the location of the pain in the foot, and whether it is due to other causes.
And if the patient is in pain, then they should be treated by applying the cushion to the affected area.
And if you find that the intestine is swollen in your body, then you must apply heat to it, and hold li's illness at bay.
"And if the pain persists, you can use a cushion under their legs."
And if the patient's legs are already swollen, it is another type of cure that applies to them.
Then apply a poultice to their body.
And sometimes they are treated with these herbs that are used to treat the illness in the feet.
Then if you are applying cautery to the patient's legs or joints, it is necessary to have the intestine treated in a similar way, as was done for the other hard parts of the body.
And they are to be treated with a cushion placed on the affected area between the patient's thighs.
Then apply to the affected area a poultice of its own or another poultice for a cold humor in the leg.
Then apply the hot cautery to the patient's feet, but do not burn them too deeply.
When the bones are already hot and the flesh is healthy, and the burning pain of gout is treated, they will be healed, and the rest of the body will be healed as well.
And if illness has already settled in the bones, it is necessary to cauterize them because they are the only ones who can truly be called healers of the body, for they are the ones who have healed it.
And if you cauterize a patient's legs, they will experience relief from the pain.
If you are dealing with a nail driven into the foot, cauterize the wound at the beginning of treatment for the gout.
And if they are sick, they will be told to be treated with a cautery.
A pointed tool is used to treat some ailments, but for other ailments, it's best to avoid using it on the area affected by gout. And for that reason, they should be treated carefully.
And those who are born fleshy are to be considered as having other causes for their ailments.
"Mays de que" in the text translates to: **And so** if there are other factors at play, such as
Mays, the pain is caused by other things, but you should use the appropriate cautery for the ailment.
Then apply heat to the areas of the body where they are experiencing pain.
And if it is necessary to separate the limbs for a moment, you should use a cushion to prevent the intestines from being touched.
And similarly if you have applied cautery to a patient's foot who has a condition of the body, the cushion will be placed in the same way on the limb.
Devices are used to treat illnesses from cold humors.
Vices can be found in many forms, some appearing as they are, others in disguise.
Then use the strong purging medicine on them as needed.
This text is written in Occitan, an ancient language spoken in southern France.
This is a tricky one, but here's my best guess:
And then hold your hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from moving.
E venis de la podragua, and another on their legs, for bloodletting in the foot.
And if you want to make that part less painful, use this method for its application.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's leg, you must first cauterize the area below the knee.
Then apply another cushion on their legs, and another to the patient.
And when it comes to the pain in their legs, it's customary for doctors to treat it with a cushion.
And so you have placed your hand upon the patient's legs, for another to be elevated.
Then apply a cushion to their legs or another on their feet.
Then elevate that which is below the other's second cushion, already opened by the first cushion, to the second section.
And then apply a cautery to the part above the foot.
When you are working on a patient's legs or elsewhere in their body, if they have a large amount of swelling or a lump in the groin, place another needle under their thighs, and another one on the affected area. Then apply your hand to the affected area; if it is necessary to cauterize, do so only after you have consulted a physician.
And when the patient's intestines are affected by the cold, they should be treated with oil and herbs.
And if the veins are constricted or twisted, then the other parts of the body also are.
Keep your prudence and you will avoid causing harm to the patient's body and pain in their joints.
The patient's form or location on their body where they are experiencing pain.
If the body has become too swollen, it is necessary to apply a cushion; if it's just the foot, then treat only the foot.
On the legs.
This disease is caused by hot temperatures in the legs just as much as by humors.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it's likely a condition that affects them.
And if it is necessary to make points on the legs it will be done.
E senhal de la l’adveniment (which means "and if it's the vein") causes the pain to be felt in the legs, and the patient's body may feel feverish when doctors apply heat.
And then you apply a poultice to that joint, and apply a hot compress to it.
And if there are other pains in the limbs or elsewhere, it is necessary to use a cushion under them and a bandage on their leg. And so the affected area should be cauterized to prevent the disease from spreading.
And if a patient has a pain in their legs or feet, they should be treated gently so that no further injury occurs.
And from these other veins, they have no need for a cushion.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's body, put a cushion under them, so that their legs are covered with the cushion for several days.
When pain arises in the joints, the doctors usually call it "gout".
And if it is necessary to treat gout, that is what I will say about it.
And when there are worms that have been generated in the skin, it is called bovine disease.
In some places, this disease is called gout because it is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, which are believed to be located in the foot.
And if there are other causes for pain in the legs, then put a cushion under the leg and the patient should be laid on their side.
When the disease has affected the legs and the body, it is necessary to apply cushions to keep the humors in check.
And if you wish to cure them and remove the pain from their body.
And if you are treating a wound that is in the flesh, apply cautery to the area where the patient is being treated.
Then return to the body's natural state, and you should place the cushion on their own flesh.
When a physician needs to make incisions, they should be made carefully on the affected area.
This disease, which is called gout, affects some parts of the body, and the pain moves from joint to joint.
And you will see that I have seen that the patient's body is already in good shape for its original condition. And I saw in another man a small swelling in the vein of his arm, which was swollen because of a gout attack.
Then, if necessary, apply heat to the area and keep your hand there for an hour.
And then place a bandage on the other arm to prevent the spread of the illness.
And you have already seen the patient's feet, which are covered in sweat. When I see you have done so, I will say that you are sick with the gout. This is how a doctor might have described treating gout in a woman's feet.
And if you think they are just that old, think of the pain of the old woman who has been suffering from illness.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery, they should be applied to the legs.
This sentence appears to be written in a language similar to French but with some archaic spellings. The phrase "e quas" likely means "and if," as in "if you wish."
Then, if you do not apply the other methods, then use others to stop the bad humors from leaving the body.
On treating gout.
Arrows are made differently for different types of wounds, and so are cauterized by applying heat to them.
And if the doctor wishes to cauterize the affected areas, they will use a hot cautery on the joints, and then put a cushion under them, so that the heat may reach the part where the inflammation is.
Therefore if there are these signs, you should stop the treatment and remove the arrow.
If the pain in the body is like gout, then you are very sick.
And when the cushion is placed under their chest.
And if the pain is located in the foot, then it is necessary to use a cushion or other means to elevate and support the foot.
The arrow has caused a wound in the stomach.
If a sharp pain occurs in the lower abdomen, there is no hope for the treatment of the illness except for the use of cautery.
If urine cannot be stopped by placing a cushion under them, it is called a dangerous bladder condition.
Perhaps the body's parts that are affected by the others can also be saved from harm if the arrow hits them.
Then you, the physician, should apply your hand to their leg or foot, and cushion (or other material) to the injury in the patient's legs.
When it is in a man's thigh, apply cold compresses.
When the patient has a pain in their legs, they should be treated by a physician.
When the Juizeu came to himself, he recognized the illness as gout.
And if you put a needle there, another guide will be needed for the cushion on their chest, and another to guide the other needles.
And it was customary for the patient to be treated with other treatments in addition to the previous ones, so that he may be healed from that illness, and no longer suffer.
And if one were to use cautery on a patient's back, it would be customary to warm the area first.
And if the woman has a fever, it is customary to call it 'leeches' plague' on her hands and feet.
And if he has been suffering from a wound or injury in the other parts of his body, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And so that the arrow does not come out of the man's arm, a small cushion is placed under his right leg to keep the other limbs stable during the procedure.
And if it is necessary to bleed the patient's feet, you have already opened the space between their legs, and it is customary for doctors to use a cushion to use on their feet, and another to use on the foot.
Then the arrow's target was the right foot.
And apply a cushion to that part to stop the swelling.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the patient’s foot in order to treat it, then the arrow should be treated as a symptom of that illness rather than a cause for concern.
Then, with the delicate point of a needle, you will pierce the body.
And apply the poultice to the affected area for four days, which will reduce the swelling, and place a poultice on their abdomen for a period of time of four days.
And then the pain will be alleviated, and the other (the patient) will have to be treated with a special tool for that.
When joints are affected by gout, the doctors say that they should be heated with cautery to relieve it.
E a quo yeu recomti a tu, this means that the physician should apply cauterization to the patient's legs.
And if a cushion is placed under them, they are called to be wise in their decisions; those who do not know how to use this new instrument will not be able to make a diagnosis with certainty.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not drawn out from the limbs in which they have been placed.
And if it is customary to do so, then apply the treatment to the legs and place the patient on their back, covered with cushions, and another one on top of the body and the other one below; for this reason, I will put a cushion under the arms.
Then leave the cushion in place for a few days while the patient's body is treated.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs, it is done by another method.
And if you don't apply a bandage to the intestine, place one on the affected leg for a few days, to see if the pain subsides.
Mays si es necessitat que the patient will be treated by a different type of cautery if you are a doctor, apply it to their chest, so that the pain in the joints is relieved.
And if you are unable to remove the arrow, and prevent it from coming out.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's intestines or legs, you must use it on all the parts that are affected by the ailment and its location.
Then use your hand to apply pressure and force the bone fragments out.
If you can't reduce it yourself, wait a few days for the body to expel the harmful humors. And so if you cause pain in your legs, it is called  a "que tu" shall be removed from the bone.
Then do as you see fit to apply the treatment properly.
And so, if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or to stop a hernia. And if your own efforts are insufficient, then seek the help of others to perform cautery on their legs.
Gout is caused by an accumulation of cold humors in the body, which can affect various parts of the body.
If it is necessary to remove the arrow, then it must be removed carefully from the bone.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs for several days.
Then you apply to the foot, a poultice should be applied by that person.
This may be a reference to a specific type of treatment or procedure used by doctors for conditions in the lower body.
Then you will need to apply a strong hand massage to the legs if the patient has a concave pain there.
If you are experiencing pain in your feet, it is necessary to use a hot cauterizing tool for that ailment.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the foot or to the legs, they are sometimes called the "knee" because of their pain.
A form of forceps is used on the patient's legs.
Let the patient be treated by applying a cushion to their feet, so that the pain may be lessened.
And if a patient's stomach or foot requires treatment, then treat them with specific remedies.
So too if pain exists in the body that occurs in the feet, one places their hand on the other to alleviate the pain.
And about bloodletting from the veins.
And if there are other causes for pain, such as those caused by humors in the gums, it is necessary to doas apply a cushion on the tongue. This is a medieval medical text describing how to treat different ailments through the use of cauterization.
And if there are three veins in the leg; one in the foot, which is called the sciatic vein; another in the thigh, and the other in the legs.
And so you must apply heat to the affected areas, but be careful that they do not become inflamed.
Then you have already prepared the patient for bleeding, and you are using the bandage to protect the place where the patient's legs will be bled.
Then you use the lancet, make sure to make a small incision on the foot to drain the blood. And apply the cautery to the top of the foot, which is located on the patient's body. And let the patient's quantity of pain be adjusted to the two bystanders who are standing by.
And so you have opened the space for surgery, and now the patient will be healed.
And that which has been described as "the treatise" by others in their works.
And if it is necessary to perform an operation on the intestines or a sudden pain in the feet.
You can see what you think those doctors are doing by looking at the definition of gout.
When the joint pain comes on their limbs.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the vein in the foot, do not cauterize them there for an hour or so, and another vein will be treated.
And so it is necessary to treat the ailment with leeches, and that is how the remedy begins.
And if it is necessary to make an incision on the patient's temple, then do so by using a hot iron cautery.
And the quality of the patient's condition is that which you have recommended to me; the other is to apply a cushion to the area where the vein is.
Then place another cushion on their legs so that they may be affected by the cold humors, which will cause pain in the feet.
And sometimes it is caused by that which causes pain in the legs.
This is the first time that I have seen this word used as "amulets".
The quality of the bandage is tied to the patient's foot, which is where they are being treated.
Then if the patient needs to bleed, perform a bloodletting on the other side.
And if it's necessary to apply heat to the blood for a long time, it should be applied with a cautery.
And may the physician treat the vein cushion in the face and feet with these ailments.
And if the patient's condition is related to the quality of their health, and you are using a cautery tool, be careful when applying it near the cushion, as it can cause burns.
This text describes how to perform a medical procedure involving the legs, likely a bloodletting.
And if it is necessary to make a cut between the intestines due to leprosy, do so carefully.
Then the quality of the bloodletting on the legs of the patient will be determined by the state of the patient's health; and they are ill-treated due to the skill of the physician.
And they should be treated by cauterizing the veins in order to correct them.
And then if it is necessary to apply a cautery, and another cushion is placed on the patient's legs, et voilà!
And if you have a small opening in your foot, use a cautery to make a cut on their hands.
The quality of their hands is that they are left to be filled with your hand by the patient.
If the patient's humors are unbalanced, they may be advised to undergo bloodletting.
"And there are two cushions for their legs, and another one for them."
Another translation: Another cushion is placed under the patient's feet to stop them from swelling.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on their foot, it will be a different procedure from that done on their legs.
When translated into English, the first sentence would be:
And then, when a poultice is applied to the affected areas, one must apply pressure with a cushion to prevent the gut from protruding further.
And if necessary, open the veins for him who has such a need, and apply a poultice to his inflamed body parts.
And so for this operation, you must carefully prepare the patient's legs and gently apply your hand to the affected area.
Mays le (the patient) must be treated for three illnesses: one with a hot iron, and another by applying a bandage to their leg.
And when the patient has a fever, they are to be burned with a cautery for a while on their legs, using a pointed instrument, and then adjust the position of the burn so that the patient's skin does not come into contact with the cautery, and it is necessary to do so.
And if the appendix doesn't come out from the other side, then do that which you would do for a hidden herniation in the thigh.
The bloodletting must be done carefully and only on the arm, so that the incision does not touch any veins in the wrist or hand.
And when there is pain in the space where the bowels are, avoid applying it to the joint, which should be treated with cautery.
And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, apply a cushion underneath; and if it is necessary to make a cut on the arm, then use your hand to hold it steady.
And if you fear that it is something worse than a simple cold, use a cushion to protect their legs from injury.
Then you should know that if blood is not drawn from the vein, you may use a hot cautery for treatment.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area if the patient's leg has been healed with another method.
And the pain in their legs is caused by the cushion, which has been placed under them to prevent the eruption of the foot and its pain.
This text describes the treatment of the condition we now know as gout.
And if you hide a wound from the world, it will be hidden from all those who would treat it; for then, leeches are applied to the wound, so that they may be treated with bloodletting; and this practice has been practiced for centuries.
And if the vein is between the bones, then you are to do what needs to be done for a hernia.
Le juvament of the young one shall be healed by the first bloodletting.
> And if the pain is in the feet, apply poultice to the affected areas; do not use oil or other ointments there.
When joints are swollen, apply a cauterizer to reduce the swelling, but only after the initial treatment.
Then at the beginning of the illness, doctors administer leeches when there is a leeching point on the foot.
Then let the patient be bled for three days.
Cutting into the body to let out blood is called "bloodletting" by doctors.
The patient is to be cauterized on their legs and feet.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot or other parts, for those suffering from the disease called gout, which affects the feet, it's done by applying a cushion to the affected area.
And if you want to remove the illness from someone who has a weak stomach and vomits, it should be done carefully.
Then apply a cauterizing poultice to their feet.
And if it is necessary to make a bath for the patient, but only if the ailment is caused by something other than gout, then hold their hands in a cushion so that they do not come out.
So is the time for the third hour that the bloodletting be performed on them.
The animals have already been pierced by pain, and the animals must be kept from harm's way.
And if the patient's pain comes from a hot humor, they should be treated by the doctor for its cause.
And if the patient has a fever, they must be treated by a skilled physician.
Then place a cushion under their arms and hold your hand on them to keep them from shivering.
And if there is a constriction that is caused by cold, the pain may be less severe.
And if there's pain in the legs, place another cushion on their feet to prevent them from feeling worse.
And if it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the patient, only use that vein when it is the one already being used for bloodletting; otherwise, use a different method for bloodletting.
Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these reasons.
And if the ailment is a pain in the legs or feet, you cauterize the leg for a short time.
And if the area becomes inflamed, it is customary to call for the use of a cautery.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent the blood from letting further out.
When you are concerned about the blood flow in your body, and fear it will come out again.
The doctor will apply a poultice to the affected area to treat the pain. And when the doctors have applied pressure to the area above the bowel pain.
And similarly in all cases where the pain is located, it is customary to apply an oil-soaked bandage for its relief.
E encase le which are the signs of the illness that you should be aware of, and how to treat them.
Then apply a cautery to the vein's flow in their legs or elsewhere.
And if it lasts for several days, you should apply [a remedy] to the affected area, a cushion should be placed under their legs, or a similar remedy used.
"Then apply heat to the affected area."
Therefore, if you are treating a patient with an injury to their leg, they must be treated in a way that addresses the cause of such injury, which is bad humors, by applying a cushion to the area.
And put on their legs a poultice to apply the treatment.
And if it is necessary to draw out blood from someone, you should use a cautery tool.
And if the pain is in the legs, it is called a black leg by physicians.
And if the surgeon needs to open a vein for bloodletting, he must use a cauterized incision.
And if there's a need to stop the pain, then apply heat to the body.
And if it is necessary to draw blood from the patient's arm, it should be done through a cut, not by using a pointed instrument for a procedure they are accustomed to calling venesection.
This method is safer than if the patient has an incision in their arms or legs.
Then apply the cautery to the area to be treated, and apply a cushion to their leg; and use other methods for the rest of the body.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs.
Then apply a leech to the vein on their body's flesh for a while.
And here are other causes for fainting in addition to those previously mentioned.
For the second time I am forced to say that the bloodletting of the body's humors, as you know, is called for when the patient suffers from a certain ailment.
Mays that the patient's arm should be bled for seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting, it is necessary to perform the second.
Here comes the second cushion under the legs, which are already supported.
Mays if you are in the midst of the operation and the patient experiences pain, then apply a bandage to their legs or arms, depending on the location of the pain.
And if you wish to release the pressure on the joint pain in their arm, treat the vein issues with a cushion, for there are too many veins to be cauterized.
When the patient's body is hot, it will be cooled with a poultice.
When the vein is inflamed, it is treated by placing a cushion under the patient's thigh.
If there is no need for a cushion to be applied on another limb.
And then apply a cauterizer to the vein in the arm or leg for the purpose of drawing out the pain by applying it there.
And if you wish to prevent swelling in the legs or feet, use a cushion and apply it under them.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the small intestine, it should be done carefully.
You can cauterize the patient's veins if they are experiencing pain in their legs.
E si es that it is the most appropriate place to perform surgery on the intestines or bowels.
If pain in the foot occurs frequently in the cold season, it may be due to the fact that the cold humors are infiltrating the body, causing inflammation.
And for a hot disease, they are used to bleed them, but the other diseases you should treat differently.
When the right side of the body is experiencing pain, the first part of the body to be treated by cauterization should be the right foot.
And the purpose of bloodletting is to remove the bad humors from the body.
And if you wish to make your hand stop at the right place.
And if it is necessary to use a hot poultice on the affected area, you should put it there, in the water bath; if the pain is not relieved by a hot bath, apply a hot compress directly to the site.
And similarly, if your doctor says you have an excess of humors in your legs, they are called gout.
And if the left-hand side of the body is affected by a disease, then apply heat to the area.
And for bleeding the feet, you should do so similarly to how you would apply a cautery to them.
And so the pain in the first parts of the body is akin to the pain of a child's birth.
The patient's condition is like that of the intestine which needs to be treated with care.
And so the physician should apply cauterization to the patient's thighs to treat them.
And if you are treating someone for a disease of the blood and they place a cushion on their legs, then put your hand over the wound to prevent them from opening their legs and spread the intestines apart, and so forth.
And if their bloodletting needs to be done.
If you wish to treat it with hot cautery, it is important to avoid cauterizing the veins in the legs.
And if the doctor makes a mistake in the first incision, he should use a cushion to prevent his hand from slipping.
And if it is a wound on the foot, it heals.
Then place (a) device on the patient's legs to prevent pain from the sciatic vein.
And bloodletting was done on the patient's arm.
And the nature of the pain in the foot is such that it is felt by the patient, but only when they are on their back.
Therefore, when you cauterize a joint or a region near it, you are to apply a cushion to the affected area, and use another cushion for the other parts of the body, and place a cushion under their legs; then put the other one on the patient's legs.
And if you have many men on their knees, they are already using the other one to be used for something.
And let it be treated, as much as possible, for the patient's sake.
And another cushion under their knees will help them to be cured.
The text discusses how to treat an ailment called "gout" by using a cauterizer on the affected area.
And for corns, and for those who are already suffering from them.
Bloodletting can be done in two ways: one on the foot, the other by making incisions and drawing out blood from the groin and legs.
And if the pain is caused by cold humors, then it's treated with cauterization, otherwise with another method.
And if there are many cuts on the body, they are already done to the body, and the patient has been treated with other cushions for the rest of the body or something like that, and a cushion is applied to the affected area.
Then apply heat to the veins in the affected area, so that it may be treated by bloodletting.
This text describes using a cautery tool to treat pain in the legs and feet by cauterizing them.
Therefore, when the doctor applies a poultice to the affected area, he must apply it properly.
And if the spine or neck are affected, it's called another type of gout.
This gout is treated by lancing the affected area to remove the excess fluid.
And if he does not heed, let him be treated by a physician.
And if you need to use a cautery on their joints they are at risk of burning, because of the way they are positioned.
And if it is necessary to use moxa on the legs, then do so in a way that avoids injury.
This describes the treatment of an ailment, possibly indicating a bloodletting procedure for conditions such as intestinal pain or another condition requiring a cut.
And when the wind is purged from the body, the patient feels better after being treated.
And if there are pains in the body that are caused by things such as the above examples, they were called by the doctors "alhazgo."
And command the phlebotomist to apply his hands.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the veins in the patient's jaw, another servant should be placed on his gums.
And if you have already cauterized the two spatulas, it's now time to treat the patient for the cold humors.
When one places the bloodletting on the small veins or the large veins in the body, it is to prevent the blood from all three parts of the body.
And command the surgeon to cauterize the flesh when the patient's body is marked by a cushion.
And so it's done on the legs and another on the thighs, which are used for applying a cushion to the stomach.
For the patient's comfort, use a hot iron to cauterize the affected area; do not use a hot iron on a thin or weak part.
If you are translating from a combination of the languages you mentioned, then the original text seems to be a mix of medieval medical terminology and terms related to those languages.
For this sentence is in Old French, and the meaning depends on the context provided by the previous sentences.
And from their legs, the patient's intestines are treated to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
And if you want to use a cushion for their chest, apply it lightly. Then apply a hot cautery to the cavity so the patient's hands don't ache.
Then return the patient's body to its original state, and another hand will hold the intestine.
When a man suffers from gout, which is in the legs, he should be treated with a cautery applied to his feet.
And command another servant to hold their hand over the area to be treated.
And if the first part of the body is used for cautery, it is translated as gout. When a patient has pain in their legs, you should place a cushion under them.
Then apply the cautery to the third degree, so that the blood flow will be reduced, but do not let it reach the bone.
And then apply a cautery to the vein in the foot.
And if we wish to have bloodletting performed, we should use a lancet for the bloodletting, and treat it accordingly.
And you are now thatch-covered, a place where they are only for the deep.
In summer, when the weather is hot, the wound should be treated with soothing oils, but in winter, it's best to leave them alone.
And if you have a large amount of excess fluid, apply an oil to it.
If the pain is in the joints and caused by cold humors, it is called gout.
Then use a cushion to support the patient's intestines while they are being treated.
And if the intestines are affected by excessive fluids, use water to cleanse them.
You should apply cautery to the patient's body if needed, but prevent it from being used on their legs by placing a cushion there.
And apply heat to the area where the bloodletting is needed, before the bleeding.
At the beginning you must consider if the patient has gout or another condition that causes pain in the joints, and apply a poultice to alleviate the pain.
Then treat it with a bandage.
And if it is necessary to make the patient's body hot, they should be given little wine or other things that are good for them.
And if the patient has an ailment related to bloodletting, it should be treated with diet and phlebotomy.
E if the patient is to be treated with a poultice on their legs or for other ailments, apply it to the affected area.
If you cauterize the liver by using it as if it were a wound, call the pain caused in the joints that follows, "gout" so that they are not mistaken for other ailments.
And if you are using a cupping glass on the patient’s legs, it is said to be applied in the same way as for bloodletting in the case of an ailment that causes pain in the limbs and affects the body.
And if it is necessary to reduce swelling in the foot, they will leave the patient alone, and apply a poultice, and they must use their hands carefully to draw out the poison.
And similarly apply it to the liver and spleen if there's a need to relieve windiness in them.
And these are applied only to the legs in this way, but also to other parts of the body.
Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to treat the underlying cold humors.
The doctors would apply heat to the area where they applied their hands to the patient's body.
Forma de ventoza es un type of medical procedure.
Then place a cushion under their arm or leg to prevent them from being harmed.
And if it is in the thigh and leg, put your hand there to stop the pain.
And if the patient has this kind of swelling; and do not let them be treated by those who are inexperienced in treating it.
And their cupping glasses were placed on the legs of young men and on the arms of strong people.
And the quality of making a point with fire is that the patient will feel better if you apply a cushion to their leg (the original meaning likely referencing the location of pain).
A cushion should be placed on the affected area to prevent pain in the intestine.
E so that's how they treat the patient's condition in the way doctors would call it.
Then in the case of a sickness of the bowels, apply a cushion to the patient's abdomen.
This is the way to treat great pain by applying a leech:
Chapter 97.
The patient's blood is drawn from his veins and leeching is used to treat other ailments, such as the use of cushions on the feet for gout.
And if the condition is found to be caused by excess humors, it is customary to treat it in a particular way.
Then if the patient has no other symptoms, place your hand on their body during the day or night, applying pressure to the affected joint in the morning and evening.
Then apply another hot cushion.
Then if it is at all possible to do so, you must cauterize the affected area.
Then, if there's a sore spot on their legs, apply a poultice.
And if you are experiencing pain in your legs, use a cloth to apply pressure and prevent the spread of the ailment.
When blood is drawn from the body by the heat of the fire of the disease, or when there are other symptoms in addition to those mentioned, a cushion should be placed under the patient's legs, and another on their chest, to avoid complications.
And if leeches are used on the affected area, you must remove them when they have finished feeding.
And if leeches are prohibited from being used, they will be burned by the recent blood.
And when you wish to cauterize, apply ashes to the legs to prevent the burning from spreading to the rest of the body.
And thus began the treatment of the thigh with the restoration of health. This chapter is essential for the practice of medicine; it deals with fractures and dislocations.
O son my intestines!
And if the doctors are concerned about what they see in the patient's body, then they apply their hands to his legs.
And if it is customary to call the pain in the feet gout, then you should put your hand on their leg.
Then I have already explained how to treat a patient with a description of the ailment based on my own experience and knowledge; now I will describe how to treat the ailment using methods that are common among physicians, as well as those used in treating a person's affliction.
Chapter one.
And another on their legs, which they should use to burn away any humor that might be causing illness. And if one wishes to burn their joints with hot irons, use the following method.
Then it is called an accident by the common people, and when there is a fracture or if you need to make points on the body, use a cushion for a cushion and another for the legs of the patient, and so that the surgeon does not have to apply a cautery to the area where the intestines are.
And if you have already treated a patient for an ailment with herbs, but they are thick-blooded, you should be careful when applying heat to their legs, as it may cause the blood to flow to the head, and the veins in the leg to be congested.
And then if you are unable to reduce the swelling in the patient's legs, return to the other methods.
E’l:  "And then apply a bandage to the wound."
Then it is said that the person has a problem in the legs.
The patient's strength will be restored if you treat them with a hot cautery when pain arises in their broken bones.
And it is necessary for the patient to be treated with a cushion under them.
When a patient's legs are injured, doctors call it by different names depending on the type of injury.
And I have seen the patient's leg in its own chapter.
Mota diversitatis in itself can be dangerous for health reasons. E so are there different kinds of bone breaks; some are caused by dislocations, and others by fractures of the bone itself.
And if there's a wound on the legs, you should use proper tools to fix it.
And then apply a bandage or splint to the legs to protect them. The pain is from a bone issue, likely related to pain in the feet.
Therefore, when there is no apparent twistedness or pain in the bone itself, then the diagnosis is not gout.
If you have a joint pain, it may be due to cold humors, so apply compression to the affected area and use gentle cauterization.
And if you have already opened the space around the patient's feet and hands, and they are suffering from pain in those areas, then apply another cushion to those limbs.
And after the apostema subsides, you should use a hot cushion to treat the inflammation.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the legs or feet, it should be done carefully.
Then apply cauterization to the second part of the body (the leg).
If the patient has pain in their bones, two cords may be necessary to apply pressure to the injured limb.
And so let your hand be placed on the patient's leg when they are in pain.
And then place the cushion on their chest, so that they are safeguarded from harm by the cushion, but be sure to use your strength carefully when placing a cushion.
Then you will touch them with your hand to heal them.
Then apply a cautery to cause intense pain if gout causes swelling in the feet.
When a body part has a problem, it is called gout when in the legs.
And for those who are small in stature like arms and legs.
Then you must cauterize the affected parts so that they do not suffer further damage.
And if it is your hand, you can use three cauteries to burn the feet, the third one being placed on the foot.
And if the patient's bowels are in danger of being affected by a burn, you should place a cushion on their body to prevent further injury. Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs, slowly at first, then gradually move it around.
Then take another bandage and bind the injured foot.
Then apply the bandage to the leg or knee of the patient.
When a doctor sees that a patient's humors are no longer causing inflammation, they can stop applying the cushion to the affected area.
And be wise in the choice of the woods used for making the fire.
And if the surgeon needs to make incisions on the patient's body parts, he will use his/her knowledge to do so properly according to the nature of the pain in other areas of the body, and place a cushion on the area being operated on.
Then you should use a cushion on his legs, as well as a bandage to hold the bowels in place.
And for the rest of the body, it is customary to apply a poultice.
Then if necessary, place cushions on their legs to prevent pain in the joints from extending beyond its limits.
And if you place cushions on the patient's legs, it will relieve pain in the joints.
You see, the patient's body has been swollen for some time, so they should be given a cushion to prevent injury.
This sentence describes applying a poultice to a wound on a patient's leg, but it's unclear if it's referring to a specific type of injury or ailment.
And if the patient's legs are injured, apply a poultice to the area where necessary.
And if you put a cushion under the patient's feet, it helps them to not get gout in their legs or feet, which prevents further pain.
This is a good sign that you are using a tool to help the patient's humors from becoming too inflamed.
This describes how to treat a patient who has suffered from injuries to their legs or feet.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's feet.
And if your leg is affected by a fracture or you need to use a cushion on the skin for pain relief, then apply it under the place where the injury is located.
Then return the pain to its proper place and put heat on the affected area.
Then, to treat them, they are applied to the patient's body.
Take 2 parts of marshmallow root and 1 part of their other herbs; then cook them in a pot (with) a little bit of water to make an ointment: take 2 parts of marshmallow root and 4 parts of comfrey.
Mays if it is a cure for a patient's ailment.
The pain is sharp and localized in a specific area of the body; the pain from that cause will be more noticeable on the feet, as they are furthest from the heart.
This sentence refers to a method of treating a broken bone using bandages.
This practice, also called cauterization, was commonly used to treat injuries by applying a hot iron to cauterize them.
And if you want to treat an injury or pain in the foot, prepare this plaster.
If you have pain in the joints due to cold humors that infiltrate your body, apply another kind of treatment. Then apply pressure to the cushion and another to their chest, to keep it from causing them pain.
Then apply that to a cloth to hold back the pain and after a time, let the patient rest for an hour; then apply a poultice to their legs and let them be treated with a poultice of water and salt.
And he has placed the cushion on their thighs.
Then apply a poultice and let it dry, and cover it with a bandage.
When the joint pain was severe in their legs, they healed them by applying a hot cautery.
E ayusta en la cushion under their legs.
This phrase translates to a description of an operation to relieve a blockage in the body.
If a doctor's hands are placed on a broken bone, and they are not able to help it at the beginning, it is said that they have done something wrong.
For I have seen that it is more reasonable to be spared from such an affliction, for they are always in pain.
Of all the types of injuries, a broken bone is an injury to the skull.
And the causes of fractures are numerous, and their shapes are diverse, some being caused by various factors.
And a cushion under the patient's legs; a cushion under their feet.
This bone is broken, and the pain in their body will be intense.
And if there is a fracture in the bone, it is called a fracture of the bones by a special term used for this type of fracture.
And if a person suffers from a fracture or other ailments, they are said to have a weakness in their bones, and another that affects the legs and feet.
Then apply a hot cautery to reduce the swelling in their feet.
And if there are fractures in the bones of the foot, they are called gout. And then you must place the bandage on their legs and keep it from them.
And you've learned about all these types of fracture, which are the ones that are treated with a cushion and those that require surgery.
And if the blood vessels are affected, it is customary to call it gout.
Then if one wants to prevent the effects of these ailments, it is necessary to apply a cautery.
And if your body experiences accidents or ailments, it is necessary to treat them immediately.
When the cause is cold or dampness in the body, it is customary for doctors to call it a disease of the foot, one should be cautious of such conditions as gout.
If you put pressure on the patient's intestine, it will be necessary to make a cut.
E si l’autre placed on their chest, they are already holding the patient.
And if you see signs of inflammation on their legs, apply a poultice to treat them according to its nature.
And if there are boils on the body, or if one wants to treat the disease known as cauterization.
And there are two types of surgery.
And so the one method goes, to apply cautery on the bone.
And then apply the cauterizing paste to the affected area for a second time.
And therefore it is necessary to apply a cushion to their feet so that they are not too hot.
And if they are burned by fire, the pain will be relieved in their joints and they leave them alone.
And if the bone is strong and stiff, it is called non-perforating by those who know medicine.
This means that doctors are wrong to call gout a disease related to the blood vessels.
And it is convenient that you burn the lower part of the leg where the pain is located, as long as the pain in the bones is severe, you will need to use a cautery for the treatment.
This is a description of three types of wounds: "And so you will treat them in a way that suits their nature, as if it were a fracture you would treat the wound on the legs.
Then, as you are accustomed to do, cut into the legs with a sharp instrument to drain the fluid from beneath their surface.
And if you are careful that the surgeon doesn't touch any part of the foot.
But if it is necessary to perform surgery on the bone, then the surgeon must use a more delicate instrument.
You have already opened the intestine and placed a cushion on their legs, so that they are ready for the treatment.
And if they are in great pain, it is necessary to make an incision on the foot.
Then return the intestine to its place, and if there are other symptoms, treat them accordingly.
And use hot cautery to treat the condition as if they were a patient who needed a cushion on their legs, but do so carefully.
When it is necessary to apply a cautery to the surface of the patient's legs, the doctor should use a cushion to prevent the burning from reaching the bones.
When a bone does not break properly, then a cushion must be placed under the area of the broken bone, and the patient's body must be positioned to avoid unnecessary pain.
And so you must put them on their knees and use the most subtle of razors.
Make a small incision on the larger vessels to help them heal.
And then it is necessary to study this art carefully. And you put another cushion under their legs, so they're ready to be healed by the great physician.
When pain occurs in your second (or other) toe, apply a poultice of oil to the affected area.
And let the patient be given this treatment for one or two days
Then administer these medicines to the patient, which are powders that will be applied to their legs to heal them.
And when you have treated the plague-stricken person, it is important to keep the wounds clean.
E therefore if it is necessary to cauteri in the other parts of le body.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area for gout relief.
And here is how to translate the following text:
On treating a broken foot.
Knowing which parts are cartilaginous, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
If a member is fractured, you should apply a bandage to it. And if you are going to perform surgery on the leg, be sure to place a cushion under it.
If a joint in the body is affected by an illness, they are to be treated with a hot cautery.
Then make two cauterizations.
And if it is possible, restore the cushion to its place on the leg of the patient; otherwise, it is best to use other methods.
E if you place your hand on their nose to apply pressure, apply it to the cushion.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the feet or limbs, they will be treated by applying heat.
And sometimes the nose is affected by a runny nose and pain that is intense in the cavity but also affects other parts of the body.
And this cause, if you wish to use it, is called gout if you have it in your feet.
And if there are other times that a boil appears on the legs, place a cushion under them.
If a boil occurs on the body, use the following recipe to treat it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause infiltration, it is called gout in the medical tradition.
Then apply heat to the nostrils, so that he will be healed by the use of a burning cautery on the legs, etc.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated, the bone is fractured.
Therefore, if the jawbone is broken, but not dislocated, the treatment is to apply heat to the affected area, and if the jaw is dislocated, it should be treated with a cushion, and then it should be set back in place.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the left side, the patient will need a cushion to hold it in place.
Then you should apply hot compresses to the two sides to promote healing.
And if there are gold teeth in the mouth, you must use a cushion to keep those teeth from being damaged and the other teeth are fixed properly with a pointed tool.
And command the patient to maintain a calm and still demeanor, and to be quiet as they are being cauterized.
And if you are concerned that the condition has been altered, then apply to the affected area a remedy that will make the patient's body return to its normal state.
And so if the cushion that you apply to them does not cause pain, the condition is not considered a true fracture.
For boils or other ailments that may arise, apply a poultice to the affected areas.
And if the fracture is caused by the bones being separated, consider using cautery on the bone to burn it.
And if the doctor deems it necessary to open the vein, then apply cauterization to the area, and place another cushion under their hand, and another under the patient's chest, etc.
Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area for the relief of the pain.
Chapter 5.
This is a description of a treatment for a condition affecting the legs, called "trinquat" in the source language.
The bone in the body can be broken in three ways: by being crushed, by being twisted, or by an imbalance of blood humors.
And if a bone is fractured or broken, or another condition exists that causes pain in the bones, then the patient's body should be treated with leeches.
And if the bone in that area breaks, it is necessary to cauterize the fracture.
And then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being injured.
And if there is no cushion available, then place your hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from suffering further injury.
And if you cannot apply a cautery to the external parts of the body, use a cushion to apply heat instead.
And you place a cushion on their legs after they are elevated, and keep the patient's arms pressed down upon the bone of the body, for the purpose of the treatment.
And so the physician puts his hand on the patient's body to treat the ailment.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on them, you must use your hand as a cushion for their hands; it is important to have a cushion for surgery.
And if you have a need to use leeches for bloodletting, use one from the person's thigh, which is another name for the area where they are applied.
The length of the operation will depend on the severity of the case, but the duration should be as short as possible.
And if you have opened the bone for the plague boil, then adjust it carefully.
And if there is little disruption, you put the cushion on their legs.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And then, for a sprained ankle or knee, apply a bandage to keep the injury from worsening.
And if the patient's pain is in the shoulder, hold the injured area open with a cushion, and you have to keep the broken bone elevated during the day.
And if the patient has fever in their legs or thighs, it should be treated within twelve days.
And apply the plaster to his legs, so that he may be treated for gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize and soothe a man's legs, it is done in twenty-eight days, after a period of twenty-eight days of rest.
The text appears to be in a language that borrows heavily from Latin, but also incorporates elements of Italian, Spanish, and other Romance languages.
This refers to the treatment of a fracture in the shoulder.
A spatula is broken in the area of the patient's body, but they are not to be treated as such.
And so, when there is a fracture in a limb, it is treated by the surgeon's skill.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, but place it carefully between the thighs according to the amount of pain.
If your body is subject to a disease, the doctors are saying you have a problem with your bowels (in this case, a condition called 'the spatula') and that's when they will say it is a case of the spatula.
And so, to treat the condition, the physician should use compression and another cushion to support the body.
And consider the foot's location during surgery; if it is soft or weak, it should be supported by a cushion.
Then apply the cautery to their legs.
The first edition of the Latin-like medical text translates to:
And then when it is done, you will have dissolved the humor that causes pain to the joint.
And if you must treat them, use a pointed cautery to drain the humors of gout.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of pain in the feet.
The foot is now open to receive cautery treatment, but the cushion must be applied carefully on the legs.
Then place your hand on their back, to prevent their pain from spreading to their thighs.
And if it is necessary to make a cautery on the patient's body, and you have to make a cautery on their chest.
Place a cushion under the patient's head and apply bandages to the affected area.
When the patient's humors are too much in the legs or chest, it is called a disease.
Chapter 8.
And then apply the cautery to their affected joints.
Sapiens, only physicians can treat gout, but do not use cushions or ointments for that purpose. And if you know the pain of the bones, then apply the proper treatment.
And apply a poultice to the affected area.
And then if the fracture is in the foot, you have to apply cautery as well, because it's difficult to treat.
And if it is a cushion which is placed under their legs, they should be given another.
Apply cauterization to the legs or abdomen (in case of inflammation) of the patient.
And if it is necessary to make points on the body, this is what is done for gout.
When they are in pain, some doctors use bandages to treat them.
Then place a cloth soaked in oil on their legs, and another on their chest, to prevent inflammation.
And if he causes the bones to be pierced by the pain which they don't want, and another cushion is put on the foot, the patient will suffer less, and fear the piercing of the bone, therefore, is lessened.
And then apply the two-day treatment to the patient with a hot compress, and use plasters to heal them.
And if the intestine or cushion is placed on the foot, it is customary to treat the patient for gout with it.
And if they are affected by gout, let them be treated on the leg where they feel it in their limbs.
This refers to a treatment for the condition described in the second sentence.
This refers to a treatment method involving placing cushions under the patient's legs during a medical procedure.
And if it is necessary to use a cauterizer on the patient's leg, then use a cushion for support and protection. And so you must know that if you have a cushion under them and another on their legs, it is customary to say they are suffering from gout.
And if you have pain in your joints, you must call it gout when applying cauterization.
And if you want to know if they will heal or not, apply a hot cautery to their sides.
This sentence refers to a medical condition that affects the legs, and states that it is not a hernia.
And if it is caused by something else, it is better and lighter to be called Mays.
And if you pierce the abscess it will be possible to apply a poultice to heal it.
And then apply a bandage to that joint so as to keep it from becoming inflamed.
When your body has suffered from the pain of gout, which is caused by points in the skin, you should apply heat to the area.
When a physician has made an attempt to fix the broken bones in the foot, and the pain is from a cold humour, one should be careful that the other parts of the body are not affected by it.
And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a cautery to the area where the pain is felt, and treat it with medicine for the treatment of the plague.
Chapter 10
Then apply the treatment for a cushion (placed on the legs) for the pain in the foot.
And if the bones are affected by the pain that makes them break, then it is customary to call it a broken bone.
And you have already placed your hand on the patient's leg to prevent a cushion from being used.
Then return the cushion to the patient's body, and hold it in place.
Then apply the cushion to the affected area. E then the patient must be burned with a cautery to remove the cushion from their leg.
Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area, while keeping the patient warm.
The first sentence tells us that if a patient's legs are affected by the mentioned ailment, the physician should treat them.
Then treat them as you would a wound.
Chapter 11
It is customary for doctors to treat gout by applying hot compresses to the affected area.
When a wound is inflicted upon the shoulder by a surgeon, he should be careful to avoid severing the tendons.
Then you restore the health of the patient's body in two ways, one by placing the joint back into its socket, and another by using a poultice.
Two more cushions are placed on their legs, so that they will be supported.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, they should be burned in several places.
And if the cushion is placed on the patient's legs, the doctor should apply a poultice.
And if the wound in the body be in the other parts of the body, it is called the other way, by the other.
And if you want to cauterize a bone or a joint, the other would be placed on the legs and another on the hands.
So if the injury is near the muscle, apply another cautery to the affected area.
Similarly, if the fracture is to the leg, you should use a bandage on that area.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays, if necessary, treat the boil by using a poultice and applying a hot cautery to the area after seven days to prevent its return.
And so you must treat the affected area with a poultice to protect its skin from the burning.
Then apply a cushion under their arms, and place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent them from being cold or inflamed.
And so you should use hot poultices.
And thus, you have opened the body to allow for another person's hand to be placed upon the patient's foot.
And then put a cushion under their legs, and another one on their feet, if necessary for pain.
And if it is a tight fit for your body, you can be sure that the doctor will have to use a cautery to burn out the bad part. And when it is necessary for the body to be treated by a physician, it is customary to treat them.
Then apply a cushion to their legs and return the intestine to its proper place.
Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs as you said.
And if you consider all parts of the body for three days, it is forbidden to eat food that causes inflammation.
Mays three days after the pain has passed.
When experiencing a fever, the patient has other conditions that may be causing the pain in their legs.
And you must carefully consider the location of the ailment, so that the pain does not spread beyond the affected limb.
And if the doctor needs to apply pressure on the foot, they will place a cushion for that purpose; and another cushion will be placed under the patient's leg.
Here comes the translation:
And if the fracture is severe, it takes two months for it to heal.
Another one
Then apply a cushion under their [the patient's] arms.
Two bones are the cause of pain in the legs; they are long bones, one calls them the small bone, which is the bone where the gout will be found, and the other one calls it a cushion.
And so the treatment by cautery should be applied to the affected area, using cushions to support the patient's legs and feet when treating them.
The doctors will call it a gouty condition if your feet are affected by a disease that causes pain in the body.
And when the pain is severe, they used to call it "a broken leg" in their own words, "the fire" is in their foot, it is difficult to heal the fracture.
And two bones are already in place on his legs, they are bound together.
Therefore, if it is the bone of the leg that is affected, it is customary for the doctor to use a cauterizer to treat it.
When the body is affected by great pain, you should apply a hot cautery to relieve it.
And if it's necessary to make a strong cauterization on the feet.
And if you have to use a hot cautery, place it carefully under the skin, so that the burn does not reach the intestine.
And if the patient has pain in the legs, hold them in place so they don't experience pain.
And then let the patient be placed on his knees.
And so you must adjust the patient's bones for their best health.
And if the pain in your body is caused by the way the bones are formed, then treat them with the power of your hands.
And if you are applying a poultice to their feet, you should apply another to the affected area, and then place your hand on their feet and hold them in place with the hope of preventing further damage.
So if there is a wound in their legs, the patient should be treated by an expert.
Then apply a poultice to the wound.
And now you will see how the patient's joints are affected by the condition gout.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, it's important to place the patient on their back or side first, and then apply a cushion above the location of the fracture to protect them from burns.
And let the sheets be soft so they do not worsen the condition of the illness.
And consider the other body parts that are near the legs to be treated for a few days. And if the pain persists, apply cold water to the area.
And let it be known, leave the metatarsal bone alone, for it is the one that must not be opened.
Here comes the first line of the English translation:
Then, if it is necessary to treat the patient's gut, apply a poultice to their legs and use other methods for pain relief.
Mays the patient has a problem that prevents them from having their bowels moved for 20 days or so.
And so the patient's leg was held in place.
And if this fracture occurs in the legs, the patient should be treated according to the disposition of the humors.
The text you provided appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in medieval southern France.
And if the patient has other problems, the physician should be dealt with accordingly.
Know that under the thumb:
And if a patient's wound or injury is located in their legs, they are to be treated as one would treat a burn.
And if the patient has a broken bone or other ailments, the doctor should know how to treat them.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
When you are treating an injury on the foot, apply a bandage to the wound to protect it; this is how to heal the wounds in your gut and feet.
And if it's necessary to cushion the palm of the hand, it is placed on the other body part.
Then if the fracture is outside the body, you should place a cushion on the thighs, to keep the leg warm and prevent further displacement.
And if the intestine is affected by the disease, or ailment, called gout, it can be treated with a poultice to draw out the pain in the feet, and another use a cushion on the foot.
Mays es que la lesa engualhat, or in the case of a fracture in the other parts of the body, the rest of the leg are treated with a hot cautery.
E consider the patient's recovery, and apply the other to the affected area if they are suffering from such ailments.
The fourteenth chapter will be read in the next chapter.
For the restoration of the bone of the leg.
The bones of the leg are broken, and they declare it to be gout based on the feeling in their feet.
The patient's body is positioned to avoid the pain of being burned by the hot cautery.
And then place his hand on their bones and another to hold them steady.
When the doctors were called, they were ready to use their knowledge on the patient's legs, which was necessary for them to do so.
And if the patient's wound is infected, it should be treated with a bandage and poultice.
And when the physician has examined the legs, it is called a malaute upon the legs in order to prevent it from being swollen. This means that if you are treating an infected area (the "abscess") in the foot, it is necessary to use a hot cautery.
Then apply a bandage to prevent excessive movement.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And so you place a cushion on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading further.
And if you have to remove a part of the body, per so you should treat the intestines as they are for the ailment.
Then you have begun to use the bandage for the pain in their bowels.
Then place two cushions on the legs so that the patient's legs are supported.
Then if they are a doctor's assistant, or if there is a problem with the patient's intestines, a cushion should be placed under them.
Then you should put the cushion under the patient's leg and hold their bones back in place.
And another place was placed a cushion under them, so that they should be cushioned against the leg.
Thus, the pain in the patient's legs should be treated with cautery, which is why it is called claudication.
And if the patient's legs are swollen or has other symptoms of illness, it is customary to call it gout.
Chapter 15.
This refers to restoring a broken or fractured bone, likely in a medical context.
This means the patient is to be treated as for a wound in the foot, but the translation needs clarification: it's likely referring to a type of pain relief treatment.
Then apply a burn to the affected part of the body, for the doctors are in agreement that this will cure the disease.
And then the intestines are restored to their proper place.
And on that round place, place a cushion for the patient's comfort.
And if the patient has a fracture, it is customary for doctors to apply other treatments as well.
This text likely describes the treatment of gout, which was a common ailment in medieval times.
And another cushion must be placed on their legs.
When the intestine and joints are affected by the affliction of cold humors, it is called  "gout" in the medical profession.
And if you apply a cautery to the body, the pain must be relieved.
And if there are two bones together, it is called gout.
And if the patient has a slight pain, then apply the lightest possible cautery to the affected area.
And if the pain is in the bone, there are other causes that are not related to the previous ones.
And then place a cushion on their legs and they will be fine.
But if the injury is in the legs, it is called "gout" by doctors, which can be treated with cautery.
When there's pain in the thigh, you can use a cushion to apply pressure.
And if it is necessary to apply bandages to the patient's thighs, one applies them on both sides, and another holds their hands down.
And apply two leeches to each leg, one on each side, three leeches being the standard number for such treatment.
Then place a cushion under them for which they are known to be susceptible to pain.
The physician is saying that if you have a wound on your foot, it is likely gout.
And when you have treated the patient for a few days, you will be able to judge if the pain is in the legs or feet.
When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
And put a tool under their legs to help with ankle pain.
When there is pain in the entire body, or the legs and feet are affected by hot and cold ailments.
Then you have already opened the patient's leg to prepare for the treatment.
Then place a cushion on the legs and hold the patient's hands above their body.
Then, place a poultice on their legs, a cushion underneath, and keep their hands held over them.
Then place a strong cautery on their legs.
And if the pain lasts for three days or four, then you know it’s a case of gout.
This may be a bit of a trick question, as this sentence seems to be describing gout in the context of the body. And cushion his other legs with this cushion as needed, so he may be treated for the condition of the intestines.
You have already opened the table on both sides, and you must make sure that the patient's bowels are properly protected with a cloth or cloth-like material, and that the quantity of this material is appropriate to the size of the opening.
And so that the patient's accidents do not suffer further injury, you should apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xviii.
And if it is necessary to apply a bandage to the foot and hold it in place with your hands, it's for the best.
When the woman's bowels are inflamed, apply heat to their location.
And so the midwife places her hand on the patient's body, gently pressing down on their legs to push the pain away from them.
And so place another cushion on their legs to support the patient's body.
And so for seven days or thereabouts.
And if you want to make the humors return to their proper place, use a cane-like tool to draw out the fluid from the affected area;
When there comes to be a cushion of cushions on the body, and the intestines are inflamed, it is then called a serious illness.
And if a bone is broken in the human body, apply the following remedy to the bones of the legs:
And es que the patient's intestines are now exposed in the cauterization process to treat your ailment, so that the patient cannot feel pain.
Mays en la vergua means "in the same way" or "likewise," indicating that this phrase continues to explain how the medical procedure is performed on the afflicted area, which in this case is the foot. The text describes a situation where the body is affected by an ailment ("les humors") that causes pain and requires the use of a cushion during the treatment.
Chapter .xix.
Then apply the other hot cushion to the patient's leg and let them be treated in the usual manner.
Translation: And if you are a doctor who treats someone with gout, they should be careful to avoid applying a cautery to their legs or feet.
Then if there is no other cause for the pain, you will have to apply heat to the affected area to prevent the disease from worsening.
And if the patient's legs are affected by gout, do not delay treatment.
You have already caused the patient to suffer from a condition that causes inflammation in the joints.
And if the joint is dislocated, put it back to its place in the leg.
Mays si is necessary to prepare a doctor for surgery.
And in this way, the patient's legs are made ready for the operation.
Apply a cushion to the legs, as if to prevent further pain.
Then, place a cushion under their feet and let them be known as the person who needs help.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, they should be treated with a hot iron.
And if the pain in the legs is caused by an external injury, apply a cushion to the injured leg.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area and let them rest on the cushion to prevent further pain.
Then cover the area with your hand to prevent the bone from coming out.
Then if you cannot reduce that bone by force, use a saw to cut away at the bone.
And then place a cushion under the area where the leg bones are located.
And if the bones are returned to their natural place, they will still feel pain.
And now if the patient's body is swollen, which means he has an illness caused by humors that are out of balance, you can use a poultice to apply pressure.
Then apply splints to the legs according to the amount of space needed for the patient.
Then if you are careful, they will be spared from the plague. And if it is necessary for the patient's legs to be treated.
Then you must apply a hot compress or poultice to that area, but be careful not to open a new wound.
When a doctor has already diagnosed an illness as plague.
Therefore, apply a hot compress to the affected area to reduce swelling on the feet.
You may need to use a cushion for support on their arm or arms. And if your legs have been opened, you should apply a cushion to their pain.
When you have put a hand on the patient's thighs, place another one on their chest, and let them rest in that position.
And then you should apply remedies to cure them from the illness.
The English translation for "Translation 1" (in your example) should be "And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient, the physician will place a hot iron on the affected area."
The treatment of the nodes (which are swollen) in the case of a broken bone.
This is what happens when one has a pain in the bowels, the belly is swollen, and it must be treated carefully.
The doctor should use these methods in the case of recent humors on the body, they are to apply remedies to the affected area.
E it is a disease that causes stiffness in the joints, which can be severe if left untreated.
Mays (meaning: perhaps) in the original language, you may need to use a different translation depending on context than if it was just a simple "yes" or "no".
Chapter 21.
And if there are humors that are causing the pain to be in the legs and they are open, another cushion should be placed on their thighs.
And you have already restored the patient's bone to its original state and treated the causes of pain in their feet.
Put a cushion under their legs if they are swollen and another on their feet if they have swelling there.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area so that they may be treated with water.
Another translation for the Latin-like phrase "E que" (meaning "And so") is provided.
And to heal broken bones, one should treat the injury carefully so that they do not cause further harm.
If the intestine or the feet are affected by the disease of humors, you have to treat them.
This is a text about treating gout and how it affects people in our land.
And then apply a poultice made from herbs like that to the patient's legs and apply a poultice of mallow to the affected area.
And if it is necessary for the patient's humors to be balanced.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's leg pain, you have already removed the cause for it.
Capitol .xxiii. would be translated as **Chapter 23**.
This Latin phrase translates to "Of speech in dislocation"
Gout is a condition where your body's humors cause pain and swelling in a joint, leading to severe pain if it occurs in the feet.
So when there's a dislocation, then apply the cushion to the affected area and close the wound.
And for that reason, you should apply the cushion to their legs in order to avoid pain from the tightening of tendons.
When bloodletting was required, let the patient's leg be bled out and let the other leg be treated by the other method.
And place a cushion on their legs, or to be precise, on the patient's ankles.
And if it is necessary to set right the patient's body, and you have made sure that the pain is caused by humors; then proceed with a cushion for support.
And apply this treatment to the affected joint.
Then move the jawbone back into its proper place.
If the joints are dislocated, the cushion is used to support the patient's legs while they are being treated.
When there is a small joint separation, it will heal itself.
If the dislocation is complete, it can be reduced immediately.
And then apply heat to the affected joint, if the pain is located in the legs and feet, and make sure that the one with the pain will have his or her body treated as a whole.
When les metges, then have they been called for the pain in the feet?
Therefore, when using a poultice for gout, apply it to the affected area.
And if he is sleeping, place your hands on his legs to keep him from going elsewhere.
And if you have to apply it to the patient's legs, you can use the cushion.
And if there are difficulties in the reduction of a dislocated bone, you must reduce the pain by relocating it to its proper place.
And when there is pain in the joints, or if you have a sore on your feet, it is a sign of a bad prognosis.
Chapter 25.
And for the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder muscle, or if you are dealing with a dislocated collarbone.
When the intestine has been opened by an incision, and another on the feet to stop the pain from spreading further, then it should be cauterized.
and if it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's body. And thus the patient will be protected from pain in their legs and feet.
And then apply those remedies to the patient's body, and other remedies on their legs, to prevent the pain from spreading.
Then the patient's limbs should be treated with the other humors to make them better.
And if it is necessary to apply an ointment, let alone place a cushion on the patient's legs, so that they are calmed.
And if they are separated from their proper place, another treatment for that specific condition is necessary.
E aplegat the patient's intestine already affected by the hernia to be cauterized, they are the same.
For the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the doctors know it as gout if the body's humors are out of balance.
And if the patient's second toe is out of place, they are treated by the doctor with a poultice, and the joint pain in the foot is caused by something else.
And thus you must apply more force to dislocate the limbs, and for those joints that are difficult to dislocate, use bandages to keep them in place.
And if it is strong, it's a bruise or a gouty attack.
Then, if there is a need to cauterize the foot, apply the cautery to the legs, and.
And it is known that when the foot's pain is caused by a cold humor, it is called gout.
Then apply cold poultice to their skin if needed.
And of this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh, as gout often is.
And the minister applies his hand to the patient's legs, and the cushion on their thighs, and the other parts of the body.
Maybe if the affected area has not been cauterized, use warm compresses to soften and reduce inflammation.
Then a cushion should be placed on their legs to prevent them from being affected by the disease.
Then place a cushion under their arms or upon their chest, and another upon their knees, to prevent the intestines from being exposed. Mays if severe, leave the patient alone.
And so the patient should be placed on the table in such a way that the leg bones are well supported by cushions.
And if it is difficult to reduce the pain through other means, they should apply this treatment:
E aprop place your hand over the patient's head to prevent them from making a fuss.
A prop·o you have placed the cushion, the patient's legs are now in its place.
And if the patient has pain in their feet, they should be treated with a cushion for their legs and a pillow for their arms.
And since the incision in his muscle has been completed, apply a poultice made from wool and the hot iron to the affected area.
And if you have another hand, and so another person should be placed there to hold it.
And if there are already cushions under them, then you can rest assured that the patient will be healed.
If a limb is affected by pain caused by humors, see that it be treated properly.
And if you place it (the cushion) on his legs, he'll be able to stay in that position for a while, but the wound will not heal.
The treatment of dislocation in the limbs, especially the legs, should be done by medical professionals.
And if the other usual remedies have been applied, but another treatment is needed.
And if you apply heat to the affected area, it will relieve pain and restore normal sensation.
Then apply the proper name for their condition.
On the treatment of dislocations.
Sapias that the patient is in pain on their legs because they are being treated for a condition by the same name, but if the patient’s illness is due to a different cause, they are simply told what the pain is.
Then you must apply heat to the affected joint, otherwise, the intestine will be inflamed, and very bad humors are difficult to treat.
This is a difficult text to translate accurately without knowing the specific context or language.
And if a dislocation occurs in the legs, it should be treated immediately to avoid complications.
And if they don’t want to use the cautery for the joint pain, other methods should be used.
And let two servants extend their arms, while another, placed on his legs, holds them in order to prevent the pain from spreading.
And apply a bandage to the arm if necessary.
When the doctor touches the joint with a cushion, he is forcing it back into place.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area and you will be able to tell which part of the body is being treated by the patient's condition.
Then apply cautery to the affected area; if necessary, place a cushion under the patient's feet.
This refers to the use of cushions and bandages for treating pain in the legs or feet.
And if you apply a cushion to it, and leave it on their legs and feet both day and night. And place a cushion on their legs; one on the first leg and another on their foot, then repeat the process on the other leg. Then return the intestines (of the patient) to their proper place.
And if you wish to apply the technique of cauterization, place a cushion over the affected area.
**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
Treating the dislocated joints in the arm.
When the foot is injured, it is treated by applying a poultice to the injured area, or by setting it in its place using cushions or other means.
And then the doctor will place their hand on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading.
This text uses the word "palma" in the context of a body part being treated, suggesting it refers to the hand as if it were an object, but it's likely referring to the concept of using a tool or treatment method on the affected area.
And so it is good if you return to it quickly.
Mayes may be treated with a hot point to draw out the bad humors.
And if the intestine becomes inflamed, apply a cautery for 5 days to keep it in check.
Then apply heat to it if you must use it on the legs.
In the first chapter, it states that the cause of the pain in the joints caused by cold humors was known as gout.
And the treatment of the dislocation of the fingers.
And if there are still some pains in their joints, and they have to be treated, then cauterize the area.
And when the pain is caused by gout, it is best to place your hand on the affected joints.
And place the support for the head of the finger.
And then place the cushion under their legs so that they do not feel cold.
And when the pain worsens in the evening, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And so you must cauterize the patient's thigh, e.g., apply a cushion to the affected area.
And similarly, for the same reason, they are called elsewhere in the body.
Capitol .xxx. translated as:
From the patient's feet, take care to remove the dislocation so that the bones are set back in place.
Then apply the other to the patient's body and use another method for its cure.
And if it is necessary to place a cushion under the patient’s legs, there should be cushions on their legs, their arms, and perhaps even at the edge of the bed, to prevent them from falling off the bed.
Therefore, it is called gout.
That's why we call it gout when doctors put their hand over them, to prevent the disease from spreading.
Mays in their chest or legs, for the healing of those parts, they used to use a poultice which was applied by me (the doctor).
The pain in the legs or feet can be caused by something that is not actually a problem with the foot itself.
Then he'll be a healthy man again, but only if the disease is treated properly.
And if it is necessary to burn it, do so carefully, using a hot iron.
Then the minister must have placed the cushion on their feet if they are suffering from pain in those areas.
And the person who suffers from it should have his/her legs tied to the bed.
And if there were two or more physicians, they would be called to heal them.
The doctor holds the patient's feet to ensure their comfort and support during the procedure.
Perhaps place a cushion under them, as you have mentioned, and another on their feet, and so they may be applied to the affected area. And if the patient's leg cramps, then place your hand on the area to prevent it from spreading to other areas.
And you have to cauterize the wound with a cushion (to prevent the flesh from being burnt) when using a hot cushion for treatment.
This translation is based on your provided example:
And in the length of the other two, its size is a foot's breadth.
Then place your hand on the patient's head, making sure to keep it steady.
And in this way, the patient will be given relief from their pain.
Then apply a poultice to draw out the cold from their leg, which is where the pain is located.
And if the pain in the joints is located in the legs, apply the remedy described above to treat the area with a cushion; otherwise, use a different method.
If the swelling remains after the application of medicines, then apply a lead sheet to that location.
When your joints are stiff from a cold and you have pain in your feet or knees, you're likely to be diagnosed with gout, which is often caused by poor diet.
This could be the beginning of a new chapter in the treatise.
Another hand placed on their thighs, they will be treated.
la causa del mal de la metges la ja has establit un other that they are caused by humors in the body.
This text describes the intestine being burned by doctors.
When bloodletting is practiced on the body, it is customary to cauterize the area where the blood has been drawn from the leg or foot.
And if you wish to treat a patient for a dislocation, make sure the skin is cleansed thoroughly before applying a cushion.
When his leg has been dislocated, the patient's legs are already being treated by another.
When the cold humors are released from the body, they will be on their legs, and the patient will have a fever in the leg.
When joints are affected by the pain caused by an illness that affects the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout, but if it occurs elsewhere in the body, it is not.
Another translation: When there is pain in the joints, it is customary to treat them according to their location.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area, but only if you are sure that the opening is new, otherwise, use their left hand for the other methods.
Then prepare a strong poultice and apply it to the affected area.
The patient's body, placed on the table, was then treated with cauterization on their legs.
And he must be held by his arms while one person holds the patient's body and another places a cushion under them, so that they don't fall through and injure their bowels.
And this kind of condition is common to all four humors.
And if the dislocation returns, it's as we have said it is necessary to cauterize.
And if the limb is dislocated, a cushion is placed under their leg, and they are lowered to the floor slowly.
Then another man will be placed at his side, who has good knowledge of the body, to cauterize him.
And this type is cured by the lightest touch to the joint.
When gout flares up in the feet, they should be treated with this kind of cauterization, apply a cautery.
And let it be known that the other has already been opened four parts to two parts.
And if the illness is serious, the cushion should be placed under the legs and not too high on their body.
And you have already placed a cushion on the patient's legs.
And if there are pain in their feet, place a splint on the foot to hold it in place.
Then if it is necessary to make a point on the legs, use another cushion for the head to prevent injury.
When a patient has a problem with their humors, they are usually treated with cauterization.
And if the dislocation is in the leg, the doctor puts the patient's leg out straight on the table.
E’s if the pain is located at the back (of the body) it is not good to make a burn there.
And if it is necessary to apply pressure to a place on the body, have it applied with a cushion.
And if you have already used a cushion on the cushions (legs) — and let it be known that the pain was severe enough to require the use of a cushion for three days or four.
Then compare one leg to the other.
When there is no longer pain in the body, then you can remove the cushion from the foot.
And if you see the need for a cushion to be placed on their legs, they should be placed there for three days.
And if the patient has been cauterized through the feet, it will take several days for them to recover.
The text appears to be in a mix of languages, possibly excerpts from different medical texts.
And so it is customary to treat a dislocation.
The patient experiences pain in their feet when the gouty humors are on the outside of the body, but if the pain is in the toes, they should use another method.
The sign of gout is when the body's humors cause pain in the foot.
And to stop the intestine from being infiltrated by something bad, they are said to be treated by a skilled hand, as we say, which should be used with care.
When your leg is exposed to cold air, you should apply a cushion to protect it from the chill.
And then apply a bandage to that area, and place another cushion on their hip, for three or four days, and use a bandage to bind the bandages.
For a few days he'll apply a cautery to their legs for them.
When the pain in the foot subsides, apply a bandage to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat the leg or foot pain.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Then apply hot poultices to the affected area and bandage them properly.
And that he has been treated for an ailment in the past, but now the cushion is placed on the foot.
The treatment for gout involves applying heat to the affected areas.
This is a tricky one!  Here's my best guess at the meaning:
And if you need to cauterize the right leg of the patient, it's done by placing the hand on the left side of the body.
Then apply your hand to their legs, and let it be applied to their feet with two right hands.
And so, place your hand on the patient's pain, as if to apply a cautery.
And then you apply the hot cautery to the third toe with a cushion.
And if it is necessary to do something twice or apply it to the foot, so be it.
Mays si a tu may have a cushion placed on their legs to protect them during treatment.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area after treating it with cautery.
And if the patient's leg is opened up to treat the dislocation.
Then, apply a poultice to the affected area.
And if you are to apply fire to it, another servant should be placed on their legs, and another one on the foot so that the heat does not harm them.
Then leave it alone for two days, and if the pain persists in the foot, apply a cushion and treat it accordingly.
And so the patient will be prohibited from going outside for 40 days. This describes a situation where someone would need to be in a position to prevent further issues from arising.
And if the patient has a fever, then you must apply a cushion to their thighs.
Another use the word "gout" in its proper sense.
This may refer to treating an injury affecting the fingers.
Cove that the patient's foot be treated with a cautery; and let the patient rest in their bed after being healed by the above-mentioned method.
If a doctor needs to use a tool to make a mark on a bone, it's called a dislocation, which is what they call gout.
Then place a cushion on the patient's body to cover the area where the pain occurs.
And if the patient's belly needs to be treated, place a cushion under it.
This is a section heading from a text written in an archaic language, possibly indicating a chapter on gout treatment.
Some joints are dislocated in the same way that a limb might be broken, or by some means separated from the rest of the body.
When the heat of a hot stone is applied to the body for too long, it is customary for them to call it a burn.
The wise doctor, who understands the nature of diseases, should carefully cauterize the affected area only if necessary. Then apply the poultice to the affected area at the beginning.
And then if the limb returns to its normal state, we are ready to apply poultice or other treatments.
And if there is a dislocation or fracture in the bones, you'll need to perform a surgical procedure.
And apply your hand to the treatment of the patient's ailments, and treat the patient's bowels with caution. When translating this sentence from Latin/Spanish/Italian medical texts: Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasis are written on the foot of a patient, and you must keep them in mind as they are the ones who will be affected by the illness. Amen.
