Chapter Ninety.
On the excision of varicose veins.
Varicose veins are twisted, thick veins filled with black morbid matter. They occur in most parts of the body, and most commonly in the legs, especially in porters, bath attendants, and grape harvesters. It is best to first employ strong purges of black bile several times.
Then bleed the patient from the basilic vein. As for treatment with iron, it is of two types: one is to incise and drain the black blood, and the other is to extract the entire vein. As for incising it, it is done in this way: first foment the leg well with hot water.
Until the thick, turbid blood dissolves, then tie the patient's leg from above his thigh to below his knee with a turban, then incise the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then milk out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and from above downwards until you extract the amount of blood that you see is sufficient, or what the patient's strength can bear. Then bandage it and order him to avoid foods that generate black bile, and repeat the purging and bleeding.
When the veins are full and this harms the patient, as for extracting it, it is done in this manner: shave the patient's leg if there is a lot of hair, then have him enter the bath and foment his leg with hot water until it reddens and the vein swells, or have him exercise vigorously.
If a bath is not available, until the limb is warmed, then incise the skin opposite the vein lengthwise, either at its end near the knee or below it near the heel, then open the skin with hooks and peel the vein from all sides until it can be felt.
And when it appears, you will see it intensely red, and when it is free from the skin, you will also see it as if it were a tendon. Then insert a probe underneath it so that when it rises and emerges from the skin, you can hook it with a smooth, blunt hook. Then make another incision near that incision, about three fingers away.
Then peel the skin from the vein until it appears, then lift it with the probe as you did before and hook it with another hook as you did initially. Then make another incision, or many incisions, if you need to.
Then extract it and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it and extract it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it to the incision above it and do this until you pull it from the third incision, the highest of all the incisions, so that when it is all out, cut it.
If it does not yield to pulling and extraction, insert a needle with strong, doubled thread, tie it, and pull it. Insert the probe under it and rotate it with your hand in every direction until it comes out. Be careful not to break it, for if it breaks, it will be very difficult for you to extract it.
And harm will come to the patient from it. So when you have extracted all of it, place wool soaked in wine and rose oil or oil on the site of the incisions, and treat it until it heals. If the varix is convoluted with twists and turns in different directions.
And it is not straight as we have described, it is necessary to incise it at every twist and turn. Then hook it with the hooks until you extract all of it.  Be careful when you incise it not to cut the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult for you to extract it. So be very careful.
Image of the lancet with which you incise the varix:
Image of the blunt hook:
It should not be curved like other hooks, and it should not be sharp at the tip, lest it injure the vein. It should have a thick bend and be smooth, because if it were thin it would cut the vein with its thinness. Rather, it should have extra thickness, as we have said.
