Chapter Fourteen.
On the reduction of a fractured femur.
The femur is frequently fractured and is perceptible to the senses because it rotates forward and backward. Its reduction is achieved by tightening a bandage above the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, with the patient lying on his face.
Then, an assistant pulls each bandage in its respective direction evenly. This is if the fracture is in the middle of the bone.  But if it is close to the origin of the femur, a soft bandage, either of wool or similar material, should be tightened.
[It should be placed] at the origin of the femur towards the pubis so that the pull is upwards, and the other bandage [should be placed] below the fracture.  Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, the bandage should be near the knee so that the pull is downwards. Then the physician straightens the bone with both hands until he restores it to its natural form.
The bone will unite well. Then it is necessary to apply the dressing and tightening, unless a hot swelling occurs in the limb. If swelling occurs in it, leave it for several days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for tightening it, a strong, wide turban should be wound around the fracture two or three times, leaving any excess. Then the leg should be bent until the heel is at the origin of the buttock, and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and leg near the knee from below, with the ends of the thread on top from both sides.
Then wind the remaining part of the turban around the leg and thigh. Then place the splints on the thigh at the site of the fracture itself, and place one of them on the leg bone. Then fill the gap between the thigh and leg with soft rags so that the tightening is even.
Then begin the strong tightening from the middle over the fracture site with three or four turns.  The further the bandage is from the fracture site, the less, gentler, and looser the tightening should be.
Then take the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, and tie the adjacent splints from above. Then pass the ends of the thread downwards until you reach the ankle, then tighten the ends of the splints on the other side with them as well.
So that the bandage does not shift from its place, leave the tightening in place as long as the limb does not experience burning, swelling, inflammation or anything similar. If any of this occurs, immediately loosen it and correct what has happened, as we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a bone fragment that pierces, you should straighten it if possible. Otherwise, incise over it and extract it and treat the wound as previously described until it heals. This fracture of the femur can also be tightened without the leg being joined to it with splints.
As we mentioned regarding the humerus and forearm, except that splinting it in this manner does not cause the patient to limp. But if you splint it alone without joining the leg to it, its owner will inevitably limp permanently.
Know that the femur tightens in fifty days, more or less, all depending on the differences in temperaments and other conditions.
