Chapter Four.
On the treatment of a constant flow of hot tears to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and their flow is from the vessels on the outside of the skull, and nothing from medical treatment with medicines has been beneficial, and you see that the patient's face has reddened.
And he feels a tingling in his forehead like the tingling of ants, and his eyes are loose and moist, their lashes eroded, and their eyelids stuck together from the sharpness of the tears.  The ancients were compelled in treating this to this procedure, and they call it "treatment with the sword." It is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then you make three parallel incisions in the forehead along the length of the forehead, and the length of the incision is about two fingers. One incision is parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second is a little distance from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third is on the other side.
And beware of cutting the two arteries that are on the sides, and keep your hand away from the joining of the jaws.  Let the distance between each incision be the width of three fingers pressed together. And have with you prepared pieces of sponge or many dry rags with which to wipe the blood.
Then you insert the sharp, two-pointed scalpel, which is pictured here.
From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, you peel with it all the skin between the two incisions, along with the membrane that is on the bone.  Then you also do this from the middle incision to the third incision. Then you take out this scalpel.
And you also insert into the first incision another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and smooth, not sharp, on the other side, and this is its picture:.
And you turn its sharp side upwards towards the flesh attached to the skin and its smooth side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision, and you cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, without the cut reaching the surface of the skin. 
Then you do that in the middle incision to the other incision, and after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, you squeeze the places where the clotted blood has been cut. Then you put in each incision a cotton wick moistened with wine and oil or vinegar and oil, and place a compress on it.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, and on the third day you loosen the bandage and use frequent washing with lukewarm water, then you treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil and all the other things you treat wounds with, until it heals, God willing.
