Chapter Forty-Three.
On incising the larynx for a swelling occurring inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx, but I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is the gist of their words. As for those with diphtheria, they should avoid incising the larynx, as they will not benefit from it.
Because the tonsils and lungs will be diseased.  As for those with a hot swelling in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, if there is no ailment in the trachea, then incising the larynx is necessary to escape the harm that results from choking.
It is necessary, if we wish to do this, to incise the larynx below three or four rings of the trachea, with a small transverse incision between two rings, as much as the incision is in the membrane, not in the cartilage.  And this place is suitable for the incision.
Because it is without flesh, and the blood vessels are far from it. If the practitioner is timid, it is necessary to stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then incise the skin until, when he reaches the trachea, he avoids the blood vessels if he sees any of them.
Then he incises the membrane that we described. And the incision of the trachea is indicated by the phlegm that comes out of it with what is pierced and by the cessation of the voice. Leave the wound open for a time.  When the time in which choking was feared has passed, bring together the edges of the skin wound.
And stitch it alone without the cartilage, then use the medications that promote flesh growth until it heals.  The author of this book said: The explanation of all of these words that we have related is only if they see that the patient's throat has been blocked by one of these swellings that they mentioned.
And when the patient is near death and his breathing is about to cease, they proceed to incise the larynx so that the patient can breathe somewhat at the site of the wound and be saved from death.  And they are instructed to leave the wound open until the crisis of the illness has passed, and its crisis is three days or so.
Then they are instructed to suture the wound and treat it until it heals. And what I myself witnessed was a servant girl who took a knife and threw it at her throat, cutting part of her trachea with it. I was called to treat her and found her gasping like a slaughtered animal. So I uncovered the wound.
And I found the blood that came out of the wound to be slight, so I knew that she had not cut a vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound.  So I quickly stitched the wound and treated it until it healed.  And nothing happened to the servant except for some hoarseness in the voice, nothing more.
And after a few days she returned to her best condition.  Therefore, we say that there is no danger in incising the larynx.
