Chapter Forty-One.
On Cauterizing Sciatica.
If pain occurs in the hip joint, and its cause is cold and humidities, and you have treated the patient with what we mentioned in the division, and the treatment was not successful, and it became chronic, then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors with purging cassia or aloe vera pills, or similar.
Then cauterize him. The method of cauterization is of two types: either cauterization with burning medications or cauterization with fire. Cauterization with fire is done in many ways. One of them is to cauterize directly on the hip itself, three triangular burns, like this image.
Make them a suitable depth, with a distance between each burn about the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive-shaped.  And it may be cauterized with one burn in the middle at the top of the hip itself, making it four burns. If you wish, cauterize it with the circle which we mentioned previously in cauterizing dislocation of the hip, one burn.
So that the circle surrounds the entire hip and burns the entire thickness of the skin. This is the description of cauterization for sciatica if the pain is confined to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize two burns on the thigh at the location where the patient indicates the pain, and one burn above the heel, four fingers up on the lateral side slightly, and the cautery should be knife-shaped, and the depth of the burn should be only the thickness of the skin.
If he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, cauterize where he indicated, with the point cautery, three or four times, or more if needed. And if he indicates pain below the knee, towards the leg, cauterize there, one time, with a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations not to burn so deeply as to burn a nerve or a large artery, thus causing the patient a serious injury or chronic illness.
I have seen one and a second person who were cauterized above the heel, and the cauterization was excessive, so the leg became gangrenous until the gangrene reached the foot, and it became entirely perforated, and the entire leg was ruined, and then diarrhea and death occurred afterwards. If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them both in precisely this manner.
Some learned physicians have mentioned, regarding cauterization of the hip, a cautery of this description: A cup-like instrument is made of iron, its diameter being half a span, and at its mouth, the thickness of a date pit or slightly less, and inside that cup, another cup, and a third cup.
And the distance between each two cups should be about the width of a thumb joint, and the cups should be open on both sides, and their height should be about one or two thumb joints, and an iron handle is made for them, firmly attached to the cups. And this is its image.
Then heat it in the fire until it glows red and throws off sparks, then place it directly on the hip while the patient is leaning on the healthy side, and cauterize him with three circular burns at once, then leave him for three days and dress him with fat, and leave the wound open for several days.
Then treat him with the ointment until he recovers.  The author of this book says: This type of cautery we rarely use because of its ugliness and the dreadfulness of its appearance and because of the few we find who can tolerate it, except that it is good cauterization for those who can bear it and for whom its location is appropriate.
As for cauterization with caustic medications, it is that you make two cups, like the ring in which the door bolt goes down, of copper or of iron.
Their rims should be about two knuckles high, or thereabouts, and the distance between them should be about the thickness of a finger, and they should be open at the bottom and open at the top, and they should be joined together in this way.
Then place them directly on the hip while the patient is lying on his healthy side, and tighten your hand well, then pour between the two circles the strong water, slightly warmed by fire, and hold it for the duration of an hourglass, and the patient must endure its stinging and burning, for he will feel a stinging like fire.
Until the stinging subsides, then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe the strong water from the entire hip with fresh water, then leave it for three days and apply fat to it until the blackness of the burn disappears, and leave it for days while the pus drains from it, for it is more effective in benefit.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a mold for it that holds water, just as you did for the hip, and this is the description of the strong water, and I have included it in the chapter on preparing medications.
Take one part alkali salt and one part unslaked lime, crush them and place them in a new pot which has a single small hole pierced in its bottom, the size of a probe, and place another glazed pot underneath the bottom of the pot.
Pour fresh water over the alkali and lime, enough to cover them by a finger's breadth after you have pressed them down firmly with your hand, and leave the pot until the strong water descends into the bottom glazed pot, then collect all of that water, then pour it over another batch of fresh lime and alkali.
For it will then be very strong and sharp, useful in many medical procedures and in cauterizing various organs, because it acts exactly like fire.  Among the medications which also cauterize the hip are thapsia, honey of spurge flax, and lime with soap, rubbed in.
Galen recounted a story about one of the ancients who treated hip pain and sciatica and greatly praised this treatment, claiming that it needed no other therapy and that it healed in one application.
Such that a person might even be carried into the bath and come out cured.  It is that green stinking hellebore be taken, but if green is not found then take the recently dried, and it is finely ground with a little fat and placed on the hip where the pain is, or on the leg, or on the thigh.
And it is bandaged and left for about three hours, or as long as the patient feels the burning sensation subsiding, then he enters the bath. When his body is moist, he enters the basin, then the pain will go away and he will be healed, God willing. If he is not healed, repeat the poultice after ten days.
For he will be healed, God willing. And know that no one should use cautery with these medications except after purging the body. Dioscorides mentioned that goat dung, if cauterized with it on the sciatic nerve, benefits it.
The cauterization is done in this manner: wool is taken and soaked in old oil and placed on the deep spot that is between the thumb of the hand and the forearm, and it is closer to the forearm. Then take dry goat dung.
And ignite it with fire until it becomes an ember, then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Then take another, and continue to do so until the sensation reaches the middle of the upper arm to the hip, and the pain subsides, God willing. This type of cautery is called dung cautery.
