Chapter Eighty-Nine.
On the treatment of an ingrown nail, a bruised nail, amputating extra fingers, and separating webbed fingers.
An ingrown nail is excess flesh that grows under the thumbnail or toenail, and sometimes grows under other nails. If it is neglected and left untreated, it swells into a hot, inflamed lump.
Or pus develops until it erodes the base of the nail, and sometimes destroys it completely, and sometimes the infection reaches the bone until it has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes livid. If you treat it as described in the chapter on incisions and your treatment is not successful.
Then you should cut away with a knife all the excess that grows from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards, for cauterization in this case is very beneficial.  However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy,
and the corner of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and caused it to be pricked and hurt, then you should place a thin probe under the corner of the nail that is pricking the flesh and lift it up, and gently cut away that flesh. 
And apply to the remaining flesh some of the caustic burning medications until it is all gone, then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the infection has affected the bone, then you should cut away that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is any diseased bone in it at all.
If you see the erosion and infection spreading in the finger, then amputate it at one of the phalanges as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals.  If the nail receives a blow or crush and severe pain occurs in it, then you should first bleed the patient.
Then incise the nail with a sharp scalpel, an oblique incision from top to bottom, taking care not to reach the flesh under the nail with the incision, for you will thereby cause the patient severe pain, and it will be a cause for the growth of excess flesh in the area. Then treat the area with what relieves pain.
As for the extra finger that develops on some people's hands, it is sometimes entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones in it, and sometimes it has a nail, and some of them grow at the base of the joint of some of the fingers.
Or they may grow on one of the phalanges of the finger, and those that grow on one of the phalanges of the finger do not move, while those that grow at the joint of the finger may move. So what is entirely fleshy, cutting it is easy, and that is that you cut it at its base with a broad scalpel.
As for those that grow at the base of the joint, their treatment is difficult, so avoid cutting them.  As for those that grow on the finger at one of the phalanges, you should first cut the flesh around it circularly down to the bone, then saw the bone with one of the appropriate saws.
Then treat it until it heals.  As for the adhesion that occurs between fingers, it often happens, and it can be something a person is born with, or it can happen when a wound or burn heals, and so on. You should incise that adhesion.
until the fingers return to their natural state. Then place between them lint or rags soaked in rose oil so that it does not quickly adhere, and separate them, or put a thin lead plate between them until the area heals as it should.
And similarly, if adhesion occurs between some of the fingers and the palm, incise that adhesion according to what is possible and what will restore the proper form of the limb.
