Chapter Nine.
On the repair of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if a fracture occurs in them - and this rarely happens to them, what happens most often is a contusion - and likewise also the vertebrae of the back, so if this happens to someone and you want to know whether he will recover or not.
Then look, and if you see that his hands have become limp and numb and dead, and he is unable to move them, neither extend them nor clench them, and if you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not feel that and does not find pain in them, then know that he will not recover in most cases, and he is doomed.
And if he moves them and feels the pinching and pricking in them, then know that the spinal cord is intact and that the patient will recover with treatment. If the vertebrae of the back suffer the same, and you want to know whether he will recover or not.
Then look at his legs. If you see that they have become limp, and what happened to the hands has happened to them, and then, if he lies on his back, wind and feces come out involuntarily, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out involuntarily,
and if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he is unable to do so, then know that he is doomed, so do not bother treating him. If none of this happens to him, the matter is less serious. The treatment for what has occurred is that you try to soothe the hot swelling.
By placing on the bruised vertebra rose oil alone or with roasted egg whites. Apply this three times a day, until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply to the area one of the strengthening, drying dressings and bandage it tightly. Order him to rest and remain still.
And he should not sleep except on the side that does not cause him pain until he recovers. If a splinter or something has occurred in the bone at the time of the injury, from which he has recovered, then it is necessary to incise the skin over it and extract that bone.
Then bring the edges of the wound together, if it is large, with sutures, then treat with healing ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, is broken, then it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus.
And straighten the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible and straightening is achieved. Then apply a dressing and a splint if needed, then tighten it.
If you feel a broken fragment in it, then incise over it and extract it, and treat the wound with the aforementioned treatment until it heals.
