Chapter Eighty-Six.
On the Treatment of Coryza and Fistula.
Know that every wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and old and becomes an ulcer and does not heal, and it constantly suppurates without ceasing, it is called in general, in whatever limb it may be, a fistula, and we call it coryza, and the fistula.
It is in reality a hard, solid, white concretion, without pain, having a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
And for this reason some have called it a feather, and it is sometimes moist, constantly suppurating, and perhaps the moisture ceases at times, and this moisture may be copious or scanty, thick or thin.
And I have already stated in the classification, when mentioning wounds, that every ulcer that does not heal and in which flesh does not grow is due to one of nine causes, one of which is either a lack of blood in the body, or its poor quality, or because there is hard flesh inside it and on its lips that prevents the growth of good flesh.
Or it is very dirty and filthy, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter that supplies it is of poor quality, or because the medication is not suitable for its treatment, or because of corruption that has occurred in the town, such as a plague, or because of a particular characteristic of the town.
As happened in the city of Zaragoza, where the maturation of diseases is difficult and the healing of swellings is naturally slow, or because there is one bone or several bones in it, and I have explained all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines in the classification.
And it is necessary for me here to acquaint you with the treatment of fistulas and nasal catarrh, which is by manual operation. Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body. Some fistulas end at large veins and arteries or at a nerve.
Or to the peritoneum, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to a rib, or to a vertebra of the back, or to a joint of the many-jointed joints, such as the hand and the foot, and some of them lead to near a principal organ and so forth.
So what is of these fistulas of this description are among the diseases that are difficult to heal, which do not accept treatment, and working on them is hardship and ignorance. If there are fistulas that do not reach these places that I mentioned, and I hoped and aspired to treat them.
And you wanted to reach the knowledge of that, then take a probe of copper or iron if the fistula runs straight, then examine it with it. If there is a curvature in the fistula, then examine it with a probe of thin lead, because the lead softens its body.
So it slips upon entry and bends towards the curvature. If the fistula has many openings, you cannot investigate them with the probe, so inject one of its openings, for the moisture that you inject with it will travel towards the other openings and flow out.
From them, then investigate thoroughly in any way you can, so that you know if there is a bone or a nerve, or if the bottom of the fistula is far or near, or if it is a single fistula with many openings.  Understand all of that to the best of your ability by inquiring of the sick person about the presence of pain when you press your hand on the place.
And such as that of the signs and causes incidental to the swelling. So, if you understand all of that with certainty, then at that time proceed to the treatment with confidence, which is that you consider, if it is.
The fistula is superficial and near, or in a healthy place, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places that I mentioned to you, then incise the fistula according to what preceded in my description, and extract what is in it of induration, corrupt flesh, and excess flesh.
And what grows in its opening of flesh or caruncle, and such as that, and treat it until it heals. If the fistula is deep-seated, and it is straight, it is appropriate that you incise it in the depth as much as you can, then cleanse it from all of its corrupt flesh.
Then use twisted pledgets dipped in sharp medications and insert them to the bottom of the fistula, which you reach with the iron instrument.  Do this to it repeatedly until that sharp medication consumes all that remains in the bottom of the fistula of corruption.
Then dress it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.  If it does not heal with that, then cauterize it according to what preceded its description.  If the cause of the fistula is bone, and that is confirmed for you, then explore it and incise it according to what I informed you, if a preventative does not prevent you from that.
A vessel or nerve, or a principal organ as we said.  If the bone is revealed to you and there is some corruption and blackness in it, scrape it until its corruption is gone, then treat it with what makes it heal until it heals.  If it does not heal and pus continues as it was doing,
then know that you did not reach all of the removal of the corruption.  Expose all that is on it again and be thorough in its scraping and cleansing with your utmost effort, then dress it.  If it heals, then good, otherwise know that that corruption is in a deep recess of corruption, expose all that is on it again.
And be thorough in its scraping and cleansing with your utmost effort.  If the corrupt bone is a small bone and you are able to extract it, then extract it with the delicate hooks which are suited for that.
If they are many bones, then be thorough in extracting them all, and do not leave anything of them to the best of your ability.  If something of the ligaments obstructs you before them, and there is no danger in cutting them, then cut those ligaments and flesh, if there is any there, and free the bones.
If you are unable to extract the bones at this time, then apply to the wound what will make it putrefy and leave it for days until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments putrefies. And protect the wound so that the incision that you made during your work does not close.
Rather, if you fear that, place upon it cotton dipped in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. For if those ligaments putrefy and the bones are freed, it will be easy to extract and pull them.
If it is one large bone, such as the tibia or femur bone and the like, and what has become corrupt of it is its surface only, then scrape it thoroughly until that blackness and corruption is gone, then treat the wound. If what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it.
And cut it all the way to where the corruption ends, then treat it until it heals.  And I will tell you about a case that occurred to a man in his leg, for you to take it as an example and aid in your treatment.  This man was young in age.
About thirty years old, he experienced pain in his leg due to a cause that affected him from inside the body until the substances reached the leg, and it swelled with a great swelling, and there was no external cause. Then time passed with errors by the doctors until the swelling opened.
And many substances flowed from it, and his treatment was mishandled until the leg became putrid and developed many openings, all of which exuded pus and bodily fluids. A group of doctors treated him for about two years, and among them was no one skilled in surgery.
Until they came to me, and I saw his leg, and the substances were flowing profusely from those openings, and the man's body had become thin, and his color yellow. I inserted the probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone. Then I examined all of the openings.
And I found them leading to one another from all sides of the leg, so I proceeded and made an incision on one of the openings until I exposed some of the bone.  I found it corrupt, eroded, blackened, putrefied and perforated until the perforation reached the marrow.  So I widened what was exposed to me.
And I dealt with the corrupt bone, thinking that there was no other corruption in the bone other than what I had cut and exposed, and that I had eradicated it. Then I began to dress the wound with healing medications for a long period, but it did not heal. Then I returned and exposed the bone again, above the first exposure.
And I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I also exposed what appeared to me of that corruption. Then I tried to heal it, but it neither healed nor closed. Then I examined it again, and I continued to cut the bone piece by piece and tried to heal it, but it did not heal, until I had cut off about a span of the bone.
And I removed it with its marrow, then I dressed it with medications, and it healed quickly and he recovered. This repetition in the procedure and incisions was necessary because of the patient's weakness and low tolerance, and my fear of his death, because he was experiencing severe fainting from excessive vomiting at all times.  Then he recovered completely.
And solid flesh grew in the place of the bone, and his body was restored to health, and his strength returned, and he managed his affairs.  And he did not experience any harmful affliction in walking whatsoever. If a protruding bone in a part of the body is broken…
It should be exposed in this manner: Take a bandage and tie it to the end of the protruding bone, and have someone pull it upwards. Then use another bandage, made of wool thicker than the first bandage.
Then tie it to the flesh beneath the bone and pull its end so that the flesh is drawn downwards. Meanwhile, you expose the flesh from the place you want to saw so that the saw does not injure the flesh.  Place a piece of wood or a board firmly beneath the bone.
Because if you do this, the saw will not be hindered from cutting the corrupted bone.  The sawing should be slightly above the corrupted area so that there is no corruption within the cavity of the bone which is not apparent on the surface, forcing you to saw it again.
If the bone is corrupted but not protruding, but rather connected together, and the corruption is in its middle or in some part of it, then expose the flesh from all its sides. Then place the wood underneath and saw it from the first side where the corruption is.
When you have finished sawing it, saw it from the other side, and let the sawing be a little distance from the corruption, as we have said.  If the corruption is in a joint, cut the corrupted joint itself and saw the bone where it connects on the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy other than scraping.  If the corruption is in the metacarpus of the hand or the metatarsus of the foot, the matter of its treatment is very difficult, but you should scrape the corruption however it appears to you, and scrape it and clean it in whatever way you can.
And by whatever method works for you, as long as you do not encounter a vein or nerve. Know that the chisels and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their placement, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, their hardness and porosity.
Therefore, it is necessary to prepare for each type of work a tool suitable for that work.
And know that the procedures themselves may guide you to the type of instrument that you need if you have long practice and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because whoever has mastered the craft has witnessed various kinds of diseases.
So he may devise for himself tools suitable for each disease, and I will depict for you at the end of this chapter a number of instruments.
Make them examples to emulate and a standard by which you can measure others, God willing. Image of a saw:
Image of another saw:
Image of a small saw:
Image of a large saw:
Image of a lancet:
The head of this lancet is in the shape of a nail head, rounded, and its engraving is like the engraving of a scalpel. It is only suitable for scraping the heads of joints if they are corrupted or a large, wide bone. Image of another small lancet:
Image of a broad lancet:
Image of another well-made saw:
Its upper bow and blade are made of iron, and its handle is made of a solid, conical boxwood shaft. Image of a lancet with a cavity:
Image of another delicate lancet:
Image of a lancet:
Image of another lancet with a curved tip:
Image of a small lancet resembling a probe:
Image of another small knife:
Image of a lancet also:
And its tip is like a file, used in many places for scraping bones. Image of a lancet suitable for scraping perforated bones:
Its tip is triangular, with sharp edges, made of Indian steel.  And similarly, all the lancets and knives that we have mentioned should be made. Image of a lancet:
