Chapter Twelve.
On the reduction of a fracture of the forearm.
The forearm is composed of two bones, called the two ulnas. One of them is small, and it is the one next to the thumb, and the other is large, and it is placed under the small one from below. Sometimes the larger ulna breaks alone, or the small one alone, and sometimes they break together.
Whenever the small, upper ulna is broken, its reduction is easy and its healing is faster. When the lower ulna breaks, its fracture is bad and its healing difficult.  And the worst is when the two bones break together. If the bone that is broken is the small, upper ulna.
The physician, when reducing it, should make the extension gentle and easy until he sets it. If it is the large ulna that is broken, he should make the extension stronger, and if both ulnas are broken, he should make the extension much stronger.
The form of the hand during reduction and extension should be placed extended on a pillow, with the thumb of the hand upwards, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient sitting cross-legged.
And let the pillow be opposite him in height so that the patient is not strained by hardship.
Then an assistant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends it from above likewise. Then the physician sets the bone until he reduces it in the best possible shape. If there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then…
Reduce each fragment to its place with your best effort. If a separated fragment appears in it and it pierces the skin, and you have no hope of reducing it, then incise over it and extract it in the manner we mentioned previously. If the fracture is with a wound, I have devoted a chapter to it.
So take the treatment for that from there. If a hot swelling appears at the beginning of your reduction, then apply a cloth soaked in cerate made with rose oil and white wax. Let it be medium between thick and thin, and tie the cloth over it gently until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the cerate and apply the prepared dressing of mill dust with egg white. Then apply the splints, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger. Know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases.
Whether the fracture is in one ulna or in both ulnae together, then make your bandaging on the site of the fracture stronger and tighter.  And as you rotate the bandaging upwards or downwards, make the bandaging a little looser, as mentioned previously at the beginning of the chapter.
Let the cloths that are wrapped on the fracture be soft and moist cloths, and do not let them be very hard. And let the thread with which it is tied be specifically linen, medium between thin and thick, as we described. And check the limb and the bandaging after [a few] days.
If something happens that needs to be corrected, such as an itch that occurs in the limb, then the limb should be washed with warm water until the itch subsides, and the limb should be left unbandaged for a night so that it can rest, then the bandaging should be resumed.
If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or something similar, then correct all of that to the best of your ability.  And also observe, if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening, then you should loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it, then tighten it.
If none of what we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be unbandaged until after twenty days or so. Then hang the patient's hand around his neck, and let his arm be straight, and he should carefully avoid sudden movements, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days, or in thirty-two, and perhaps it heals in twenty-eight days. All of that is according to the states of the humors and the states of strength.
