Chapter Eighty.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body are a thickening and hardness that occurs near the anus externally, or in the perineum on one of its sides.  The fistula may be singular or multiple.
If this thickening persists, it opens and a watery white fluid or thin pus flows from it.  Some of these fistulas may open into the anus and into the intestine, and some may not be open.  Open fistulas can be recognized by the feces and gas that emerge from them when the patient defecates.
Worms may also emerge from them. Sometimes, if they are in the perineum, fistulas may open into the bladder and into the urethra, and some of them may open into the hip joint and into the coccyx.  How to distinguish a fistula that opens into the anus from one that does not.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the fistula if the fistula is not curved. If it is curved, insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair into it.
Until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger. If you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the opening, neither feces, nor gas, nor worms, as we have said, then know that it is not open, so proceed with treatment.
If the fistula opens into the bladder or into the urethra, the evidence is the passage of urine from it and the inability of the area to heal with medications.  If it opens into the hip joint or into the coccyx, the sign is that the probe reaches there.
If there is no curvature towards the bone, and if there is pain in the area and pus constantly coming out of it, and treatment is ineffective and it does not heal with ointment, then these open fistulas are not curable at all.
Their treatment is a futile effort for any ignorant doctor who attempts them. But those that are not open and not chronic may be hoped to be cured with iron, as I will describe and as I have tested.  You lay the patient before you on his back.
And raise his legs upwards with his thighs inclined towards his belly. Then you insert a copper or lead probe, if there is a curvature in the fistula, until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it near the anus, you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel in your finger that the probe has emerged by itself, exposed, without feeling any membrane or flesh between your finger and it, then know for certain that it is open, so do not bother with it, for it is incurable, as we have said.
They have said that it heals in some rare people.  And among the treatments which may be hoped to be beneficial is that you heat a thin cautery, according to the width of the fistula as described previously, and insert it hot into the fistula until it reaches the vicinity of the anus. Then you repeat it two or three times.
Until you know that all the excess clotted flesh, which resembles the tube of a bird's feather, has been burned. Then you treat it with wicks soaked in oil until the burned flesh comes out. Then treat it with healing ointments, if it heals.
Otherwise, it will never heal with any other treatment.  But if you insert the probe and it does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick barrier of flesh or membrane between it and the probe, and you see the fistula on the side of the skin surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula.
And you pass the incision along the probe, while it is in the fistula, until you reach with the incision the end of the probe, and the probe is freed and falls out.  Then you clean out the clotted flesh which resembles the tube of a bird's feather, leaving nothing of it.
Then treat it with healing ointments until it heals. If the blood overcomes you and prevents you from working to cut the flesh, the best thing to do, and the quickest benefit, is to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine because cauterizing with fire combines two good things: burning the excess flesh.
And stopping the blood and drying the moisture.  Then treat it with wicks soaked in oil or powdered sulfur with oil until the area suppurates and the burned flesh comes out in the pus. Then treat the wound with healing ointments that promote the growth of solid flesh.
These are the medicines that have astringency and dryness, for when it has healed, it is cured and will not relapse. If the fistula has reached the depth of the anus and is far from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the anus and examine with it.
If you feel the probe and there is a barrier of membrane or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetrating, then the action in it is only by way of hope and expectation. That is, you employ in it one of three methods: either you cauterize it, as we said,
Or you incise it until you reach its bottom so that you can, by inserting wicks and treatment, be close, and do not overdo the incision, lest you cut the muscle surrounding the anus, causing the patient to involuntarily pass stool. Then treat it with what we have mentioned, and perhaps it will heal, as we have said.
Or you penetrate that barrier and pierce it after you incise it close to the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with another sharp-edged instrument. Then you clean all the clotted flesh that is in the incision to where you are able with thoroughness.
Then dust the entire wound with powder, including the incision and the upper opening, until it seals, and keep the fistula open within the anus, so it will be easier for the patient. The fistula may sometimes perforate in this way.
That is, if you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on one side of the anus toward the surface of the body along with the skin and edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end like a cobbler's needle, in this way:
And insert into it a thread twisted from five threads or so. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its bottom. If it opens into the edge of the anus from the inside nearby.
Then bring the thread out from that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and bring out the end of the thread. Gather both ends together and tie them, and leave it for a day or two. Every time the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the ends of the threads is severed and falls off. Then treat the wound until it heals and recovers.
If the opening of the fistula is not perforated, then perforate it however you can, unless it is very deep, then you should not do that because of the muscle, lest you cut it. Then do with it as we have mentioned until it heals.
Image of the pointed scalpel with which fistulas are incised. Its curve is very sharp and the other side is not sharp, so that you do not cut with it what does not need to be cut, as you see:.
