Chapter Sixty-Five.
On the Treatment of Inguinal Hernia.
This hernia occurs from a tear that happens in the peritoneum extending over the abdomen around the groins from the thin part of the abdomen, so the intestine falls from that rupture to one of the testicles.
This rupture occurs either from a tear in the peritoneum or from its distension, and these two types occur from many causes, either a blow or a jump or a shout or lifting something heavy and so on. And its sign, if it is from distension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time. 
And it does not happen suddenly, and the swelling is level towards the depth because the peritoneum constricts the intestine. And its sign, if it is from a tear in the peritoneum, is that it causes great pain from the beginning suddenly, and the swelling is different, appearing under the skin nearby.
That is by the intestine exiting and going outside of the peritoneum, and the omentum may also exit with the intestine, so this hernia is called intestinal and omental, and it may be with air.  And the stool may run into the intestine and be trapped there, so it results in the death of the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially when squeezed, and treating these types of ailments with iron is dangerous, so you should avoid engaging in it. The method of operation is that you order the patient to return the intestine with his hand into his cavity if it is possible to return.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then you stretch the skin adjacent to the groin upwards and incise the entire skin of the testicle lengthwise, then you insert hooks in the lips of the incision to the extent needed to open the incision with them.
And the incision should be as much as allows the testicle to come out, then you dissect the membranes that are under the skin of the testicle until, when the hard white peritoneum is exposed from all sides, then insert your index finger next to the testicle.
Between the white peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second peritoneum, and with it you release the adhesion that is behind the testicle, then fold with the right hand inside the skin of the testicle, and with this you stretch the white peritoneum upwards with the left hand and raise the testicle with the peritoneum toward the incision.
And you order the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and you release the adhesion that is behind it completely, and you search with your finger lest there be something from the twisted intestine in the hard white peritoneum, and if you find something of it, then push it into the abdomen below.
Then you take a needle containing a thick thread spun from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle adjacent to the incision, then you cut the ends of the doubled thread so that there are four threads.
Then you arrange them on top of each other in a crossed manner and tie with them the peritoneum that we said is under the skin of the testicle, a tight knot from two sides, then you also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that none of the vessels that nourish it are able to reach it.
So that a hot swelling does not arise from that, and it also becomes a second ligature outside the first ligature, distant from it less than two fingers, and after these two ligatures, you leave from the peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle the amount of a finger's breadth.
And you cut all the rest around it and remove the testicle with it, then you make an incision below the skin of the testicle, an incision from which blood and pus flow, as we described previously, then use wool dipped in oil and place it in the wound and use the bandage that we described.
And the white peritoneum that we mentioned may be cauterized after cutting it, to prevent bleeding, as that often occurs, and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself; if its falling is delayed, then it should be moistened with hot water and something that makes it sweat should be applied to it until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated with the rest of the treatment for wounds until it heals.
