Chapter Eleven.
On the types of inverting the eyelid.
If eyelashes grow on the eyelid excessively, unlike the natural way, beneath the natural eyelashes, and persist, they will harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickening, until it causes blindness.
Inverting the eyelid is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or with a sharp medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or the inversion may be by cutting and suturing, or with reeds, as I will describe.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it does not turn, then insert a needle with a thread from below the eyelid and pass the needle with the thread from above, and this should be near the hair itself.  Pull the thread upwards with the eyelid.
And turn it over with the probe, then make an incision inside the eyelid, below the excess hairs, with the lancet, from the greater angle to the smaller angle. Then pull the thread and place a small pad of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, then mark the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of a myrtle leaf, except that the shape should be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, because people may differ in this, for some need to cut a suitable amount from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid has relaxed.
And some need less cutting; all of this depends on the degree of eyelid relaxation. Then incise with the lancet on the two lines that you marked, starting from the greater angle to the smaller angle, and each incision should be near the natural hair, about the thickness of the probe.
Then insert the hook into one of the corners of the skin, then peel it all off.  Then join the two edges with sutures using a needle and fine wool thread. Wipe away the blood and stick down any excess threads on the eyebrows with something sticky.
If you wish to do this, then do so, otherwise don't bother. Then leave the sutures and threads for about three or four days, then treat it. And if you wish, you can leave the wound without sutures and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid will lift when the wound closes and joins.  Suturing is better. 
This method of lifting I have mentioned from the ancients, except that it is troublesome for the patient, although it is good work and without danger.  There is also another method of lifting, which is to mark on the eyelid a shape like a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then lift the eyelid with three hooks, which are either separate or joined, in this manner:
Then cut the excess eyelid with small scissors in this manner, cutting evenly:
If you cannot hold the hooks and it doesn't work for you, take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the shape. Insert another thread near the larger corner and a third thread near the smaller corner.  Gather the threads evenly between your fingers, then lift your hand with a moderate lift.
And lift the entire marked skin as we have described, then join the edges of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.  If a hot swelling appears when you cut or incise, soothe that swelling with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
It can also happen that the lower eyelid turns in, and it is necessary to use what we have mentioned of cutting, suturing, and cauterizing with fire or with a sharp medication.  Cauterizing with fire or with a sharp medication is more effective and easier on the patient than cutting and suturing, while cutting and suturing are more effective in the other cases.
Cauterization with reeds is done in this way: you turn the eyelid and make the incision on the inside as described, then make two thin reeds or pieces of wood the length of the eyelid and width less than the width of a scalpel.
Notches are made at their ends on both sides where the threads are held. Then they are gently placed on the excess eyelid and tied firmly from both ends and left there for several days.  Thus, the tightened skin dies, turns black, and decays.
Until it falls off by itself. If it is slow, cut it off with scissors then treat it until it heals.  When it heals, the eyelid will be lifted, and the lashes will not irritate the eye.  This is a picture of the two reeds, made in this shape and this exact size in length and width:.
