Chapter Fifty-Nine.
How to inject the bladder with a syringe.
And the forms of the instruments that are suitable for it are made of silver or of hollowed ivory, having a long thin tube like pus.  And if you wish to instill fluids and medications in it, this is done with an instrument called a syringe, and this is its form:
It is made of silver or hollowed ivory, having a long, thin tube like a probe, all of it hollow except the tip, which is solid. It has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the hollow place in which the piston is should be of a size that fills it completely, without excess, so that when you pull something of the fluids with it, they are drawn in, and when you push with it, they are propelled to a distance, like how the pump is made with which naphtha is thrown in sea battles.
If you want to introduce fluids into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the fluid and pull the piston upwards, then the fluid will be drawn into the cavity of the syringe. Then insert its tip into the urethra as we described for catheters, then push the fluid with the piston.
Then that fluid will reach the bladder as intended until the patient feels it. And this is the image of another fine syringe with which the bladder is injected:
It is made of silver or lead, its upper head resembling a small funnel, and below it a groove in which the tie is placed. Then you take a camel's bladder and put in it the fluid with which you want to inject the bladder, then you tie it tightly between the two partitions with doubled thread.
And warm that liquid a little over the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, then firmly squeeze your hand on the bladder containing the liquid so that the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
If you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around its edge, then insert a strong thread into those holes as you rotate, then gather the circle like you gather a tablecloth after you put in it what you want of fluids, oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
