Chapter Seventy-Seven.
Containing illustrations of the instruments needed for extracting the fetus.
Illustration of a dilator with which the mouth of the womb is opened.
This bookbinding press, which is used for flattening books, likewise has two screws at the ends of the two wooden boards, except that this screw should be finer than the press and should be made either of ebony or boxwood, and the width of each board should be the thickness of two fingers.
And their edge is about a finger's breadth, and their length a span and a half, and in the middle of the two boards are two posts of the same wood, securely fastened to them, the length of which is half a span or a little more, and their width about two fingers or a little more, and these two posts...
...are what are inserted into the mouth of the womb to dilate it when you turn the two screws. Illustration of another instrument for the same purpose, finer and lighter:
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that it has two posts at its end, as you see, the length of each post is about a span and their width is two fingers. So when you want to open the womb with it...
...have the woman sit on a bed with her legs dangling spread apart between her thighs, then insert these two posts closed together into the mouth of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs, then open your hand with the instrument as you do with the forceps in the same way, to the extent that you want to open the womb.
...so that the midwife can do what she wants. Illustration of another screw mentioned by the ancients:
Illustration of the instrument with which the fetus is pushed.
Figure of the perforator with which the fetal head is perforated.
It resembles scissors with teeth at the end, as you see. It may also be made rectangular like forceps, in this way, as you see, with teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it cuts and crushes.
Figure of another pusher.
Figure of a hook.
This hook should be somewhat thick so that it does not break when the fetus is pulled with it. Figure of a hook with two barbs.
Figure of two broad scalpels for cutting the fetus.
All these instruments, the more numerous their types and the more prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster his work and the higher his esteem among people for his skill. So do not disdain to have any instrument prepared, for it will certainly be needed.
