Chapter Forty-One.
On incising tumors that occur on the scalp.
Small tumors appear on the scalp, and they are of the types of sals. Membranes surround them, which are their envelopes, like the crop of a chicken. And their types are many, some of them are fatty, and some of them contain moisture resembling mud.
And some of them contain moisture resembling pus and broth, and so on. And some of them are hardened and solid. All of them have no danger in incising and removing them, unless you encounter an artery during the incision.
The procedure for incising them is to first probe them with the instrument whose image comes after this, which is called the probe, until you know what they contain. If what they contain is moisture, then incise them lengthwise with a simple incision like this image:.
And begin the incision from line B to line C. When the moisture is emptied, peel the sac that contained that moisture and cut it all out, leaving nothing of it at all, for it often returns if anything of it remains.
Then dip cotton in the Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in salt water, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day, as it will eat away what remains of the sac. Then repeat the application of the cotton with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary.
Until you are certain that nothing of the sac remains. Then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the swelling contains a fatty substance, incise it in this way:.
A cruciform incision, and place hooks in the lips of the wound and peel it from every side, and strive to remove the membrane that contains it.  If an artery obstructs you, do what I described to you later. And do the same with the swelling if it is hardened, as regards the incision.
And the treatment is the same as I mentioned.  The incision on the hardened swelling is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these swellings that are on the head in some people may have no moisture at all, for I have incised a swelling on.
the head of an old woman and I found the swelling like hard, rough, white stone. No one could break it, and if someone threw it, it would cause injury.  And what is other than this of the various swellings occurring on the head, such as the swellings that appear on the heads of children.
And at the bases of the ears, incise them all with a simple incision and make their lower part lower so that the flow of matter to the bottom is facilitated, then treat them with the appropriate treatment.
