Chapter Twenty-Six.
On the reduction of the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is that it is dislocated towards the armpit downwards, the second is that it is dislocated towards the chest, and sometimes it is dislocated above the shoulder, and that is rare.
It does not dislocate backwards because of the scapula, and it does not dislocate forwards because of the nerves. It mostly dislocates and comes out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is little, because it comes out quickly and goes in quickly in them.
As for those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite of that, I mean that it comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty. Sometimes a person suffers a blow or a fall, and the shoulder swells with a hot swelling, so it is thought that it has been dislocated. It is necessary to examine it until you determine its true condition.
Then you proceed with its treatment.  The dislocation, if it is downwards towards the armpit, is recognized if you compare the dislocated shoulder with the healthy shoulder. You will find a clear difference between them, and you will find the head of the shoulder indented and, when touching under the armpit, the head of the shoulder is like an egg.
The patient is unable to raise his hand to his ear or to move it with all movements. Likewise, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, you will find that apparent to the touch, it will not be hidden.
This dislocation can be easily reduced if it is fresh or if the patient is a child. To reduce it, an assistant raises his hand upwards, then you place the thumbs of your hands under his armpit and strongly lift the joint upwards to its place, and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then he brings it down, and it will return quickly. If it does not return with what we have mentioned, and the dislocation has been present for many days, it is necessary that the patient bathe in hot water and use an emollient that relaxes and softens, such as cooking marshmallow root, fenugreek, and melilot in water and using it.
Then the patient lies on his back, and you place under his armpit a ball of wool that is moderately soft and firm. Then the physician places his heel on the ball and grasps the patient's hand with his hand and extends it downwards.
And he pushes the ball with his foot, and it will return to its place. And if you wish, you reduce it in this way: you bring a man taller than the patient and have him stand at the side and place his shoulder under the patient's armpit and lift his armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air.
And another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his abdomen. If the patient is light, then it is necessary to hang something else on him to weigh him down, and the jaw will return immediately. It can also be reduced in another way.
It is that you fix in the ground a long piece of wood whose top is rounded like the rim of a mortar, neither thick nor thin. Then you place it under the patient's armpit after placing a soft cloth on the top of the wood, the patient standing along the length of the wood.
Then you extend his hand downwards from the other side and also extend his body from the other side with force, and the joint will quickly return to its place. If its reduction is difficult by all that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood about two cubits long.
And its width is about four fingers and its thickness about two fingers, having a rounded head to facilitate its entry deep into the armpit, in this manner:
Then you tie soft cloths on the rounded head so that the wood does not harm the patient, then it is placed under the armpit and the entire hand and forearm are extended down along the wood, and the wood is tied to the upper arm, forearm, and the edge of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a horizontal beam of a ladder, and the hand is extended downwards and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side, and the joint will enter immediately. When it has entered by any possible means, then it is necessary to place a moderately sized ball of wool under the armpit.
Then the prepared dressing of mill dust with frankincense and egg white is carried over the entire shoulder as it revolves from above, then the ball is tightened firmly from under the armpit and the bandage is wrapped over the dressing from above, and his hand is suspended from his neck.
And he is left without moving his hand for seven days, and the patient's food should be made small so that the limb strengthens, for it is faster for his recovery. Then after seven or five days it is loosened and he practices movement, and if it is stable and does not relax, then he has recovered. 
If the joint dislocates frequently due to an acquired moisture or another ailment, then cauterization with the three needles should be used as described previously in the chapter on cauterization. If you do all of this and loosen the bandage after seven days and the joint is not stable.
And you repeat the dressing and tightening on it several times and it does not stabilize and falls and loosens and you are not able to raise it upward, then know that its nerve which is at the top of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or loosened. Know then that the joint will never be stable in its place.
As for the dislocation which is towards the chest and breast and backwards, its reduction is by pushing and extending with the hands until it returns, and all the tightening and treatment are used on it until it heals. If after healing, there occurs heaviness in the limb and slowness in movement,
then the patient should use the bath frequently until that heaviness softens and it returns to its original state.
