Chapter Eighty-Four.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the section on cauterization the treatment of similar things, and here I will discuss their complete treatment by hand and with medications. I say that wounds differ according to the object causing the wound and according to the location where the wound occurs.
The things that cause wounds are many, such as the blow of a stone, or the cut of a sword or knife, or the thrust of a spear or stick or arrow, and many other such things.
As for wounds according to the locations on the body, they are like the wound that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and other such organs.
I will describe the treatment of some wounds so that you can use them as a standard and rule for all other wounds, and I will begin with simple head wounds specifically, because complex ones will be mentioned at the beginning of the third book of this work.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, you should examine it. If it is from the blow of a stone or similar object, and the skin is only torn, and the wound is large, and you fear the occurrence of a hot swelling in the patient, then hasten to perform phlebotomy at the appropriate site.
Do not delay this, and draw blood according to his strength, if there is no impediment preventing phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is slight. Let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warn the patient against fullness, drink, and coarse foods. If something prevents him from being phlebotomized, then he should reduce his food intake and avoid meat and drinks.  Apply to the wound, if a hot swelling develops in it, cotton dipped in rose oil alone, or with an astringent drink.
If you are sure there is no hot swelling, then dress the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not changed it, with the powder that I will describe to you shortly.  But if the air has changed it, apply some ointments to it.
Until pus forms, then treat it until it heals.  If the wound is large and is from the cut of a sword or similar object, and its edges do not come together with bandages, then bring it together with sutures as I will describe in suturing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has peeled back, exposing the bone, and is attached only by a small piece, cut it off, then treat the wound with medications that will generate solid flesh in place of the skin. Instruct the patient to eat strengthening foods like heads, porridges and the like.
If putrefaction occurs in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the putrefied part and discard it, then treat it.  If in these wounds there is an artery or vein bleeding, and the bleeding does not stop with medication, search for the artery/vein.
If you find it and it is not severed, sever it with a scalpel and tie it off. If necessary, if what we have mentioned does not work, cauterize it until the bleeding stops.  If these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy, it is sufficient to treat them by sprinkling this powder on them while they are still bloody.
Before the air changes them. The recipe for the powder is: take one part frankincense, two parts mastic, and three parts slaked or unslaked lime. Grind all together, sift, and pack it into the wound, and bandage tightly so that it adheres well.
It will congeal with the blood. Then bandage it over with compresses and leave it undressed as long as it does not swell, for the medication will not come off until it heals. Lime alone can be used for this, if you do not have frankincense and mastic.
This same action can also be performed with bandages on many large wounds if it is applied skillfully and bandaged tightly, and the wounds are fresh with blood that has not been altered by the air. However, if the air has altered them somewhat, especially if it is summertime...
...then applying this powder is pointless. Treat it as we have mentioned, by applying some ripening ointments or a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey until pus forms. Then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
If, however, a slight bone fracture occurs with the wound, then set it with splints. I have described the treatment of skull fractures previously, in the section on neck surgery. Now, if the wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
However, if a nerve or artery in the neck has been severed, if it is a nerve, there is no other recourse but to avoid treating it with anything strongly astringent, such as verdigris, vitriol, and the like, because they harm the nerve and cause it to spasm.
Nothing cold should be placed on the wound at all, because the essence of the nerve is cold and it is connected to the brain, which is the noblest of organs.  And what you treat it with should be softening medications, such as nūra washed with fresh water several times, moistened with oil or rose oil and tutty.
If it is also washed with fresh water, and all the metallic stones in this manner and moist ointments. However, if the wound is large, use sutures or bring its edges together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound is deep and an abscess has formed at its bottom where pus has collected, lance it at its lowest point. If an artery has been severed in the wound and you find its blood flowing, cauterize it, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has severed some or all of the cartilages of the larynx, but the jugular veins are intact, bring together the edges of the skin with sutures over the trachea. Do not touch the larynx, but smooth it and return it to its natural shape, then tie it tightly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it. If there are bone fragments, extract them all, or as many as possible.  And what you cannot extract, leave it until the wound putrefies, heals, and its removal becomes easy.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powders that we have described. If the bone putrefies in the wound and becomes a fistula, treat it as will be mentioned in its chapter, on surgery of the chest and between the shoulders.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or knife and you see that it is deep, observe.  If air comes out of it when the patient breathes, know that it is a fatal wound. If it is not deep and is fresh with its blood, do not put powders in it at first, and do not bind it so that blood is not trapped in its depth.
It would be driven back to the heart and kill the patient. But put in it a drawing ointment and change it twice a day. If you do not have an ointment, place a piece of worn cotton at the mouth of the wound to absorb the moisture that comes out of it, and have the patient sleep on the wounded side.
So that whatever gathers in it will drain.  And if three or more days have passed since the injury, and the patient has not developed convulsions, a bad pulse, or shortness of breath, and you see that all his other conditions are good, know that the wound is healthy. Treat it with bandaging and other treatments until it heals.
If it is difficult to see it, and the stench continues, know that it has become a fistula, so treat it according to its chapter. [Have] the patient [lie] on the wound so that whatever gathers in it will drain.  And if it has passed to a wound of the chest or back, treat it with the suturing we have previously described.
If it is large, or with powders if it is small.  If it has affected the bone and broken off fragments, examine the wound and proceed to remove those fragments if they are loose.  If they are not loose, leave them until...
the wound putrefies, for it will be easier to remove them. As for other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, their treatment follows the same rules as we have described.
