Chapter Eight.
On the reduction of ribs when fractured. Know that rib fractures occur only in the thick areas near the back, while their front ends are subject to contusion because they are cartilaginous, and knowing this is not hidden from the senses when examining with the fingers.
Their reduction is by straightening the fracture with the fingers in a secure manner until the shape is as it should be, then bandage and splint the broken bone if needed. If the rib fracture is angled inward, it causes severe pain to the patient.
And a pricking like the pricking that occurs to someone with pleurisy, because the bone pricks the diaphragm, and also causes him difficulty breathing, coughing, and expulsion of much blood, and this is difficult to treat. The ancients devised many tricks for it.
Some of them said that the patient's food should be such as generates flatulence and wind, so that the abdomen swells and expands, and the fracture is pushed outward. We dislike this, lest it be a confirmation of the occurrence of a hot swelling if it has not occurred, and if it has occurred, it increases and confirms it.
Some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on the area and then sucked strongly, which is more like the standard, except that it is feared that the cupping glass will attract excess to the area because of its weakness.  Some of them said that the area should be covered with wool dipped in hot oil.
And padding is placed between the ribs until they are filled, so that the bandaging is even when you wrap it around the circumference. Then the patient is treated with the treatment of pleurisy, with regard to food and medicine. If the patient is afflicted with a severe matter that he cannot bear…
And the bone was piercing the diaphragm with a harmful piercing, and we feared for the patient, so it is necessary to make an incision over the area and expose the broken rib. Then we place under it the instrument that protects the peritoneum, which has been described previously, and we cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we bring together the edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs during that time, then quickly soak compresses in rose oil and place them on the area, and also treat the patient internally with that which soothes the swelling.
And he lies on the side that makes sleep easier for him until he recovers.
