Chapter Ninety-Six.
On Cupping and How to Use It.
Cupping vessels may be made of horn, wood, copper, or glass. Cupping is done in two ways: one is cupping with scarification and letting out blood, and the other is cupping without scarification.
This cupping without scarification is done in two ways.
Either it is with fire or without fire. The cupping vessels that are used with scarification and bleeding have fourteen locations on the body. One of them is the cupping of the nape, which is the back of the head, and the interscapular region, which is the middle of the nape of the neck.
And the cupping of the two akhda'ayn, which are the two sides of the neck, and the cupping of the chin, which is below the lower jaw of the mouth, and the cupping of the shoulders, and the cupping of the coccyx at the base of the tailbone, and the cupping of the two forearms, which are the middle of the arms, and the cupping of the two legs, and the cupping of the two ankles.
Cupping only draws blood from the thin veins dispersed in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not cause a drop in strength like phlebotomy.  Cupping, whether with fire or without fire, should not be used in any of the diseases that result from fullness until the whole body is emptied.
If there is a need for cupping, due to illness or habit, we use it at any time, at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, in the middle of it, and at any time.
Some people, when they have an excess of blood to the point that they need to remove it by cupping, feel heaviness and headaches.  Some feel fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Others feel itching in their face and temples, darkness and burning in their eyes, and some itch at the site of their cupping.
Some laugh excessively. Some taste blood in their mouths, their gums swell, and they spit blood. Others sleep excessively, and some see blood, redness, the slain, wounds, and similar things in their sleep.  Whenever we see any of this...
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we then order cupping two or three hours after the start of the day. As for the benefit of wet cupping, it benefits heaviness in the head and water pouring into the eyes.
But this should be after purging the whole body. This cupping may be a substitute for cephalic venesection.  One should beware of using it on someone with a cold brain or who has a cold, as it will greatly harm them.
Therefore, it should not be used on the elderly or those with cold ailments in their heads. Whoever becomes accustomed to it will develop forgetfulness.
Therefore, you should instruct the cupper to lower his hand with the cupping glass slightly downwards, for fear of causing forgetfulness. As for cupping the back, it is a substitute for venesection of the brachial and basilic veins.
Therefore, it is useful for asthma, shortness of breath, obstruction of the respiratory system, coughing, and fullness.  The cupping on the back should be raised a little because if it is placed too low, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
Cupping on the two jugular veins is beneficial for headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, sore throat, and pain at the roots of the teeth. It replaces venesection of the basilic vein.  You should instruct the cupper not to go too deep with the incision, lest he sever an artery and cause bleeding.
Cupping under the chin is beneficial for thrush in the mouth, gum disease, and similar ailments in the mouth, and it can replace venesection of the vein in the lips. Cupping on the shoulders is useful for palpitations resulting from fullness and heat.
Cupping on the bellies of the two forearms is beneficial for the same things as venesection of the three veins: the basilic, the brachial and the cephalic, because it draws blood from all the thin veins in the flesh. These thin veins draw from other, thicker veins until the drawing reaches the three thick veins. 
You should instruct the cupper not to make the incision too deep because the area is devoid of flesh and has nerves and arteries underneath.  As for the single cupping applied to the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids and ulcers of the anus.
You should instruct the cupper to use a large cup made of copper, because the area requires strong suction, and a glass cup might break. He should make multiple incisions. Cupping on the legs noticeably reduces fullness.
Because it draws blood from the entire body, it benefits chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, stimulates menstruation, helps with pimples and boils, and serves as an alternative to venesection of the saphenous and ankle veins. However, it greatly weakens the body and causes fainting in most people. Cupping the ankles has benefits similar to cupping the legs.
The method of applying cups is as follows: first, place the cup empty and apply moderate suction. Do not leave the cups on for long, but rather apply and remove them quickly so that the humors flow evenly to the area. Continue repeating this process until you see the area has reddened and opened up.
And when the redness of the blood appears, then make an incision and reapply suction gently. Then consider the condition of the bodies. For those with thin flesh and open pores, you should only make one incision, lest the area ulcerate.
And instruct the cupper to widen the incision and deepen it slightly, and to apply the suction gently with a gentle movement. If the blood is thick, he should make two incisions. The first time to open a path for the thin, watery blood, and the second time to completely extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very turbid, he repeats the incision a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to extract a little blood, we are satisfied with one incision. If we want to extract a lot of blood, we make more incisions, and if we estimate that the blood is thick.
then it is necessary to make a deep incision, and the moderate limit for the incision is the depth of the skin only.  What oils and waters should be used when applying cups, and what the person being cupped should avoid.  As for someone whose skin is thick, hard, dry, and whose pores are narrow,
it is necessary to anoint the places of the cups with opening, softening, resolving oils. If it is summertime, then use oils such as oil of roses, or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seeds.
If it is in the winter, then use oils such as oil of narcissus, or oil of iris, or oil of chamomile, or lily, and the like. If the excess is thick and cold, then let the oil be oil of marjoram, or oil of pennyroyal, or oil of rue, or oil of dill, and the like.
If the person being cupped has wide pores and soft flesh, then it is necessary to abstain from oil. These people should wash their cupping sites after cupping with rose water or cold water or nightshade water or pumpkin water or purslane water and the like. As for someone whose blood has much moisture,
they should wash their cupping sites with vinegar or with myrtle and sumac water and the like.  As for those whose excesses are thick, they should wash their cupping sites with old wine or with marjoram water or a decoction of dill or chamomile and the like.  It is necessary to avoid cupping in the bath and immediately after the bath.
Rather, it should be employed an hour or two after leaving the bath.  No one should sleep after cupping. How the person being cupped or bled should be managed before cupping and after it.
You must first observe.  If the person being cupped or bled is choleric and his blood is predominantly sharp and inflamed, then he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and chicory with vinegar, and lettuce, and oxymel, and julep and the like. And he should make his foods baby chickens and lamb, vinegar-based stews, and dishes with sour grapes, and the like.
Whoever has a cold temperament should be given honeyed drinks and a drink of grape syrup or oxymel with seeds, and should consume fragrant, medium-aged wine that is between old and new. He should be instructed to eat little food, and his food should be baby chickens, partridges, small birds, and young pigeons in white stews. The drink on the day of cupping and bleeding should be more than the food.
It may be necessary at times to give some people some of the antidote al-Fārūq or musk medicine or theriac before cupping and before bleeding or after it to strengthen the principal organs and thin the blood.  It should not be given to those with fevers.
As for the cups that are applied without scarification, they are the cups that are placed on the liver and spleen and breasts, and on the abdomen and navel and the location of the kidneys and the hip joint, because these organs do not tolerate scarification on them.  Rather, the purpose of them is either to draw blood from one organ to another.
Like when we place the cup on the breasts in the case of nosebleed, or we use it to dissolve cold wind that has become trapped in the organ, like placing the cup on the abdomen and navel, for it loosens the organ and warms it and removes the pain by dissolving that wind.
It may also be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone in them, so by the strength of its suction, it may open the blockage or remove the stone from its place.  And it does likewise when placed on the liver and spleen when wind is trapped in them. These cups may be used empty, by suction only.
They may be used with fire, and they may be used filled with lukewarm water in cases of hemorrhoids, and that is that you fill the cupping glass – and let it be large – with hot water alone, or with water in which some of the herbs suitable for that have been cooked.
Then it is placed full on the area, and held and removed and repeated several times as needed. And this is the image of the cupping glass that is used with fire.
The width of its mouth is two open fingers, as we have depicted, and its depth is about half a span, and there is on its side, about halfway down, a small hole about the size of a needle. It is made of Chinese copper or yellow copper, with a thick rim.
It is smooth, level and polished so that it does not harm the organ when placed on it, and there is in its center a transverse rod of copper or iron where the candle is placed with fire.  And this cupping glass may be made larger than what we have described, and smaller, according to the ailments.
Its use is established. Indeed, the cupping glasses for boys and thin people are not the same as the cupping glasses for men and thick-bodied people. As for how to place this cupping glass with fire on the organ, it is that you prepare a wick with fire from well-twisted flax or a small candle of tar, and you place it on the center of the fixed rod that is in the center of the cupping glass.
So that the ascent of the fire upwards is towards the bottom of the cupping glass, so that the patient's body does not burn.  Then it is placed on the organ, and the finger is on the hole that we mentioned, so that if we hold the cupping glass as long as we need, we remove the finger. 
And the vapor comes out through that hole and the cupping glass loosens on the spot. Then you prepare the wick in the manner described and repeat it if you need to. As for the cupping glass that is used in the treatment of erysipelas with water, it has neither a fixed rod nor a hole.
It is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the organ only.  And this is its image:
And this cupping glass, the larger it is to hold a lot of water, the better.
