Chapter Six.
On the treatment of what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and glass; or a plant seed, such as chickpeas, kernels, and the like; or a flowing thing, such as water, vinegar, and the like.
Or an animal.  When a pebble or something like a pebble falls into the ear, something that does not grow in the ear, face the sun with the ear. If you see the pebble, drip some violet or iris oil into it, then try to remove it by moving the head or sneezing using hellebore.
Block the nostrils when the sneeze comes after placing a ring of rags or wool around the ear and pulling the ear upwards, for it often comes out with this treatment.  If it does not come out, try to remove it with a delicate forceps, which is pictured here.
If it comes out with the forceps, then good. Otherwise, try to remove it with a smooth, slightly curved, blunt hook. If it does not come out with that, then make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube gently into the ear canal.
Seal around the tube with pitch softened with oil so that the air has no passage except through the tube, then draw it out strongly with your breath, and it will often come out with this. If it does not come out with what we have described, then take a little bit of opopanax gum, or the prepared gum that is used to catch birds, and place it on the tip of a probe.
After wrapping it tightly with cotton, insert it gently into the ear canal after drying the ear of moisture. If it does not come out with all that we have described, then proceed to incision before a hot swelling or convulsion occurs.
The method of incision is that you first phlebotomize the patient in the cephalic vein and let out blood according to his strength. Then you sit the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards and make a small incision at the base of the ear near the lobe in its lower part.
And the incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the pebble. Then you remove it with whatever instrument you can, then you quickly sew up the incision and treat it until it heals.
If the thing that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that swell and expand, try to remove it by what we have mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a thin, delicate scalpel like this.
And try to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear. You only do this if you are certain that the grain has been moistened by the vapor of the ear so that it becomes many small pieces. Then remove it with the blind hook, or with a delicate forceps, or by suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove it.  As for water that has entered the ear, the patient should first use sneezing with hellebore, having filled his ear with some worn cotton, while lying on the ear that has the water in it. If it comes out with that, [then it is good].
If not, then take many pebbles about the length of the fingers, thin and smooth, and warm them slightly by the fire.  The patient inserts one into the opening of his ear and hops on one foot on that side, and strikes with another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
He continues to do this with pebble after pebble until all the water comes out.  The water may also be removed by taking a piece of papyrus or feather and inserting one end into the ear and setting fire to the other end until most of it burns, then repeating with another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out, or draw it out with the tube as mentioned previously regarding the pebble.  As for removing an animal that has entered it, see: if it is small-bodied, like a flea and the like, treat it with what I mentioned in the section; however,
if it is large-bodied and perceptible to the senses, then attempt to remove it with forceps and hooks, and the matter is easier than all that which adheres in the ear.  As for removing worms generated in the ear, if you have treated them with what we mentioned in the section on ear drops in the treatise on drops, and your treatment has not been successful,
it is appropriate to look into the ear in the sun.  If any worms appear to you, then extract them with forceps or delicate hooks.  If none of them appear to you, then take a tube, which is pictured here.
Narrow at the bottom, wide at the top, insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate, then suck strongly with it. Do this several times until all the worms come out. If it does not respond to removal, seal around the tube with wax, as I mentioned to you regarding the pebble.
If they do not come out with what we have mentioned, use the eardrops that I mentioned, which were tested by the ancients for killing worms, and you will find that in the treatise on eardrops.  And your pouring of oils and medications into the ear should be with this instrument, and this is its picture:
As you see, you make it from silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wide at the top.  And if you wish, the injector that is inside the tube can be of sealed copper.  And if you wish, take a probe and wrap cotton around its tip, wrapping it tightly.
Then put the oil or juice, or whatever of these medicines you desire, into the tube while it is in the ear.  Then insert the probe with the cotton from above, and squeeze it with your hand with a moderate squeeze, until the oil is propelled into the cavity of the ear and is felt.
The patient should feel it entering.  And whatever you pour into the ear should be warmed slightly over the fire.  Beware that the thing that is dropped in it is not extremely cold or extremely hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
