Chapter Thirty.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck occurs, or if many vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no treatment for it, because death comes quickly to the ill person.
And the sign of this is that the patient's feces come out involuntarily, he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs become relaxed, either his legs, his arms, or one of them.  However, if a single vertebra is displaced from its position, it can often be corrected.
Its displacement can be in four directions. The one that dislocates posteriorly is called a hump. As for its treatment, you should observe: if the hump has occurred from childhood, there is no treatment for it, nor is there any cure at all. However, for one that occurred due to a fall, a blow, or something similar...
The ancients have mentioned it with various kinds of treatment in lengthy discussions, most of which are not beneficial. I have summarized from that what little suffices instead of much of what they have presented, by my approaching the meaning and explaining it. I have also depicted the instrument differently from what they have illustrated and explained. 
So I say that the hump which occurs from the front in the chest has no remedy and no cure from it, and likewise the ones to the two sides also. Only the one which occurs in the back is specifically treated by what I will describe, which is to lay the patient on his face.
On a level bench near a wall, and spread a damp cloth underneath him so that his chest will not be hurt. Then place a vertical wooden plank, fixed in a hole in the ground, at the edge of the bench toward his head and another wooden plank toward his feet at the other edge of the bench.
An assistant holds the plank – let it not be fixed in the hole – and another assistant holds the other one in the same manner. Then, wrap around the patient's chest and under his armpits with a soft, tight bandage and extend the end of the bandage to the plank which is at his head and tie it there.
Then tighten with another bandage above his thighs, above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bandages together and tie them to the other plank which is at his feet. Then each assistant pulls the plank in his direction with the bandage, and the two planks do not move from their fixed positions.
Except that they are not fixed, as we said. And the physician places his palms on the vertebra with force until it returns, or he places a board on it, then leans on the board with his feet until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, then take a board which is about three cubits long.
And dig in the wall, which we said should be near the patient, a place to insert the end of the board. Then you place the middle of the board on the hump and the physician places his feet on the other end and pulls well until the vertebra is pressed.
And it returns to its place. And if you want to do it with the screw that is turned by hand, that is, you fix in the ground at the patient's head, at the end of the bench, two planks, the length of which is a cubit, and at his feet, at the end of the bench as well, two planks.
And let the distance between each plank be a span, and in each plank a hole is made through which the screw runs. And all the planks are firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move at all. And you insert a rounded rod, which is the screw in which the bandage is twisted, into the holes of the two planks.
And at its end is a hole in which a rod a span long is fixed with which it is twisted, and in the other two planks, the same. Then you tighten the bandage that you tightened on the patient's chest in the screw that is at his head, and the bandages that you tightened on his legs in the screw that is at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each screw, turning his hand with the turner with which the screw is turned, and the physician straightens the hump as we have described. And this is a picture of the screw, the bench, and the patient:
Then, after the vertebra returns and the place becomes straight, it is necessary to apply the desiccative dressing with egg white, then the splint, then you place on top of the dressing a splint made of a board whose width is three fingers or so, and whose length is enough to cover the hump.
And on some healthy beads, then it is tied with the appropriate bandage, and the patient uses light food until he recovers. If some protrusion remains in the place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to use the medications that relax and soften with the use of the board that we described for a long time.
And a lead plate may be used for that. A protrusion may appear at the end of the vertebrae of the back, and it may be thought to be a dislocation, but it is an extra bone that has grown, so do not treat it with this treatment, as death may occur.
