O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from top to bottom, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fathers except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the ferrumens of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our times, is the art of medicine elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behooves him who undertakes to learn in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and of the moving and resting veins.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and little with the work; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm men; thus I have seen many times more of those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I see a foolish doctor who cuts into an abscess or a lump on a woman's neck, and cuts the arteries of the neck; because so much blood flows out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a old man's bladder, and the stone was large; if he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the old man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they touched him he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage there was a wound; and the doctors, out of ignorance, held the breakage over the wound as if by strong ligature, and did not leave the wound to heal, and they left it thus; and they commanded that he should not move it; and meanwhile it happened that the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release his leg; and when I saw it dislocated, he was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the entire corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another case where a abscess was forming, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, young son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: this is to know, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in conscience, and undertake your maladies lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the diseases that bring grief and sanitation; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish people."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to twelve chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and on the forms of instruments, and on the iron rods for cautery, and all that which is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and on cupping glasses and wounds, and on the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and on the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and on the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses; and from this they speak to the wise ones, and agree with them; and I hide few words, for I reduce their length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery aids universally for every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some devised none and said that fire cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not effective for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite, that fire cautery makes great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body frozen.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicinal burning.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member by a little name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines pass from one member to another in alleviating, and bring to the afflicted member relief from painful suffering; and thus often cure the sick person.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make that, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I withhold the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they choose carefully.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries which occur are often cured by the aid of cautery; and similarly, the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasty ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear son, as the foolish doctor; for in the disease that is healthy from cautery there is no return; and he says so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine by the hastiness of its value, and by the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease worsens at some point according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluous things are assembled in him by the acquisition of food and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered at the right time or there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries are dense for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears well that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than iron, and did not say it was because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and said that the eyes of the cautery do not make putridity, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and gold cauteries are worth more than iron, as they loudly declared.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much, they create an obstacle at the fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we do not use iron cautery that we have made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just below, because the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	for fire cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there they are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of songs and pain of teeth and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold if it is like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine, solutive and mondifying the head, either two or three times, according to whether the virtues and ease and the habituation of the patient can suffer; and then do it again on the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make them sit cross-legged between your hands, and put their hands on the soles of their feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cautery fire on the affected area, marked with ink, and do it by descending and straining your hand little by little while rotating; then lift your hand slowly, and turn the area so you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little of silk, and put in soft and loose cotton underneath, and put on the affected area, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on a warm compress in a wrapping; and leave it until the swelling is gone; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said, the ancients, that when you leave a wound open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore it helps to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one of these should let the cautery burn part of the bone, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said that one should let the cautery burn above, and thrust so strongly that one abates from the bone as large as .i. the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew it up.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some homes where there is a path of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and it seems to me that when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healthy and moderate for me, and of this use I often assemble a healthy salut.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain at the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that one, a little, as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make a cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is in this way that one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those on which one makes the cautery on the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with mondifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are done, but none of these help: then you do cautery according to several methods, namely of medicine agar and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine agar is that you take a dose of alum, and remove the crust and recover it; then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the dose of alum beneath the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then untie it and treat further with the dose of oil, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on a cotton pad smeared with balm so that it sticks in place.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that it does not work with any of the combined medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combined medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery from where it is in the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a claw or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the skin of the heart is cauterized; and lift your hand so the artery is not harmed, which is defective, and decorates abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in the wound of the vein, and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moistened cotton in a poultice, and afterwards cure the spot of ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to harm the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizers do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the top as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cauterizer that we have said in this chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizer that has .ij. cuts; and this cauterizer is better than the previous one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has tried solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cauterizer which is called "points", because it is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After making points all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij. where the pain holds in both, and you slope a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the bite; and it has .x. points around each ear; after curing the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with a flow, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this type of torture that moves with a flow of fluids and evacuations from the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery above the head of the ear a little beneath the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cut be a little larger; after curing the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not profit at all, and the patient has no fever, then you make three fire cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the place that is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last fire cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be treated thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you must give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, take the whole head of the patient, and place on the occiput the plaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the book of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus sane, it is good; and if he is not, you make three fire cauterizations from the head down to the neck, leaving a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat the wound as the others, and if you have seen it become swollen, and the patient is suffering, you make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two others on the two horns, and treat until he is sane; and it is the cautery that is called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, take the head of the patient, then make a cautery on the head and on each horn, and on the back and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is strong, make three cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is reached, and lift your hand; afterwards, treat until it is healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics must not use fire cautery unless it is phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is greatly suffering and unable to bear medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew soothing food to calm the brain often with good meats; afterwards take the head in the middle, and perform fire cautery as we said before, and perform fire cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, perform fire cautery as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the fire cautery be gentle according to the method I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, perform subtle fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excess or corrupt and gross fluids, then perform fire cautery with such fire cauteries as we said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining excess fluids leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will calm their brain, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the patient has been repositioned; after making a well-made circle, as if it were a crown, place it on the head; and let the patient be cross-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; after presenting the linen, take measures to avoid old berbescio; and heat it with fire tempered in this way, so that they may not suffer the pain; after wetting the circle thoroughly within the head, and let it cool down; and do this for each patient once a week with another good government, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you see that the cautery is made by making many points on the entire cautery. This method of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then place cotton wool in a poultice with grease from geese.
de l’awe des eulz	of the warmth of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery on the head, and apply .ij. cauteries to the temples if the descents of the awe are in .ij. eyes assembled, or if they are in one; and touch all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issue, then staunch it with a little power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery how you will hold it steady; and no one makes a cautery or cut beneath the .ij. bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	because of the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear in the head's deformity; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending into the eyes: .i. cautery on the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or cutting beneath the .ij. bones; and if it is more necessary, then one should carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	here is the translation:
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit him, then give a drink to the patient; afterwards raise his head, and make him undergo fire cautery or gentle olive oil cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the three veins, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery so you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive". For it is the shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it makes three cauteries on the three veins as long as the little hairs are; and do not let your hand stop until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	where hair grows to a point on the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pustules, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the foil of a dead man, and it is the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk scales on the eye, then heat the cautery according to its form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same spot, as you did previously; and if the hairs are fallen out, cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizers of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as they can be; then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living coals, one half ounce each, and crush them well together; and do it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and apply to the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then you must operate on one, and also anoint similarly; and put beneath the eye a soft cotton ointment in the form of an egg; and the head of the patient should be healthy and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he feels burning as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the skin of the eye, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraining force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then reapply the medicine on the same spot where the medicine did not take hold, until your operations are even, and your eyes are in balance; then put soft cotton ointment in a blistering manner until the bitter humors are purged, after curing the eye of the ailment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you are a master that you take great care of your work with great care so that no point of the medicine touches the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the one who is softened by the proper paper, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the double-edged mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and thus their constructions; and do not mistakenly reply to the right path for him who is the student of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the cure of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you cauterize them according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position; and hold the extremities of their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor nod its head; afterwards apply moist cotton in a stream of warm water or juice of persillium on the spot; afterwards heat the cauterization tool which is thus: and it is shaped like a pen made of wood, assembled so that the cauterization tool is thus; if you see, if it is appointed from one part of the head to another, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but in any case, this which is shaped thus is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Here is the translation:
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	Here is the translation:
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make a quantity of a .Z. of poultice; and hold your hand or a firm cane, and the patient does not move at all, so the poultices applied do not run to their oil; and it is necessary to put on the patient's oil a cotton wool swab in a stream of water or in a bath: the poultice if it is the art of fistula, and the healthy one by marvelously sanitizing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pungent applications to the nostril, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is necessary in its own proper flow.
des crevaices en levres	from cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "pox", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of the skull that we have spoken about in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery collar according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it hastily in those cracks until it reaches just at the font; after treating the skull of wax until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has made pus and is swollen and becomes fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after boiling or piercing the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron rod reaches the font of it, and where the back of the skull; and do it once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the skull and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	two movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then place the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you put a chain over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards remove your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with warm saliva, and hold it for an hour and strongly fumigate.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of teeth comes from cold, or it has cold or vein, and the cures of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of borax is such that you take borax of a vein, and the tip in a spoon of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil it in borax water, and put it on the aching tooth immediately and hold it as long as it cools down; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and borax water are cold, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron rod so the fibers reach the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery is such that you take a small iron or copper rod, and it should be thick so the fibers do not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, so that it forms a crust afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold it with your hand as long as the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be gone the same day or the next day. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good borax water in the impression of this cautery, and then roots firmly; and this is the form of this cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery according to what you wish, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scalp ulcers are from flux and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery iron from there, and it will come into form, and has two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery once over the abscess, or as many times as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a moist cotton dressing so that the discharge is eliminated; after curing, treat the wound with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures descend upon the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolvent medicines; after, apply cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but rather a little. After, apply another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavile" from which we have the form before us; and cure the wound as we have said before, until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the swelling
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the chest are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever or shivering, and it is an old disease, then you make two cauteries on the strong part in their void; and another cautery between two marmots; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that was mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking all of the cautery that is called "poins" because the form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just to ..., or somewhere within. After healing the limb according to what was said before, and let the cauteries be at three veins according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are more delicate, therefore you make three of them in a copy.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soothing the patient on his back and on his side; after lifting the heart which is within the titillated area as two of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has .ij. nerves douqueil it is in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates to the side, and thus would be the figure of the cautery with three cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery that has .iij. nerves, because the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it placed on this .i. nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying fire cautery, burn the hairs with a flame; then have the patient rest, and do not stretch their limbs for too long until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is reinforced, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of fullers-in
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one must do fullers-in cauteries of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cautery thus. Cauterize between the forceps and the neck, and do small cauteries descending a little into the part that is beneath the beard; and do cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little; and do a cautery in the foot, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one as thus. One does not press with their hand, but rather makes an aperture, just like when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Here is the translation:
de la mice	of the worst
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the worst from what we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they usually resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of the methods is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the worst, according to the figure of the cautery of the fire that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all of the cautery, and let the patient be conscious on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has three nodes, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the worst, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations which you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Here is the translation:
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, unless it is done in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you perform three cauteries around the bowel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in a place near the chest; and let the cauteries be very close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, let the cautery be opened for a short time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will come together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a club, which we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously described.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauterer without turning. And do not enter too deeply, lest you should disturb the citrine water, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, do the same on both legs, making two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterizations be from top to bottom, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing, so that the water escapes; afterwards, cure with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the massage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them undergo fire cautery on the finger, and perform fire cautery on each part, and small fire cauteries on the stomach below the navel, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you perform fire cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all divided below the almond-shaped and triangularly, and perform fire cautery below the navel. Two should be done.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then perform a large fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire clavicle cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the limb so that it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems suitable, and then apply it fully to the affected part of the "thelul" cut; and leave so much space with your hand that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of swollen limbs benefits while they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected part, it will provide more significant aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer touching or manipulation, which we will discuss in its place, a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Here is the translation:
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the kidneys comes from cold, and from great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman's womb, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other to the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a thousand places, they will have three cauteries in a line, and will do more great aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is affected and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the upper part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as our thumb; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have a smaller need; and let the clavicle cautery be according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then it is necessary to apply three cauteries around the belly, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries beneath the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moist viscous fluids descend to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the places of departure are visible, so it is necessary to apply three cauteries around the hip bone in a circle, and mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present for you, make three cauteries of the large olivary ones, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is according to three methods: that is to know ensemble medicines burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the thigh in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olivary; never do they make a cautery in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are three according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery is applied to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the curvature should be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the manner in which one performs on a sciatic, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little on the left side; and let the cauteries be cutellaire, and let the spaces around the curvature be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers of the foot or nearly there, make the cautery where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, make them do more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make them perform cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were perceived as corrupted all the way to the feet. Afterwards a abdominal abscess from which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parties assembled, make cautery on one and the other, in this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Here is the translation:
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain two fingers
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or too great an evacuation, or from similar matter being cold and spread out, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after that to empty the patient of filthy pills or similar things, which one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautery claw nail following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted spine when they stand up, and fear; and you find it in the lower back and in the appearance that comes on the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the cautery should pierce each part of the spine equally. And if you want to, then cauterize around the spine with the poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the place so it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer cautery in gibbosity which is in spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mountain of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point that they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, two or three cauteries for each part, at every olive-shaped cautery; and if you have more skill, do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary, as long as the fire of the cauter is burning.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we described in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the sides or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge fluxes, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes to the loins, and the intestines descend into the flanks and it is newly formed, then you should see that when you want to cure it, it does not harm anyone that day; and that it uses things that loosen the belly, so that the fiends come out of their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at every sign that should be similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Here is the translation:
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Here is the translation:
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made poultice, and for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great replenishment of drinking and eating, and of too high spirit; and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe the treatment of surgery in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the wound of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come in other bellies and are cognizant, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make him 10 cauteries from the cautery according to their quantity, and be careful with the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at 8 angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the place of the incision and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand inside all the cauterized clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more tender.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in no member, or from falling or striking, and that pain lasts long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torcions and its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it's good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it should change in the member that is proximate, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient be healthy.
de meselerie	of messelry
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The messels are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the malady that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see that it is to be cauterized, take heed that the malady is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it descend or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not infect the whole patient, then you do .v. cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head anew, and another towards the forehead at the end of the veins; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the nape; and let it be so much that your hand reaches to the bone, and so long as the scabs issue forth as if the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mess is scattered all over; and it appears manifestly, so it is necessary that you apply cauterization to these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and one cauterization on each knee, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and three cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the last vertebrae calcifying, so you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you cauterize, the more you aid, and it profits; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already almost entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the iron instruments. After healing the limb with flour and honey and other treatments until it becomes healthy.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes into a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, but it does not heal, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure it with ointments until it is healthy. And sometimes one makes a cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed; and never intervene unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and issues of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	about ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of fenugreek and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chancre comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cautery at the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tumor. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the tumor; and always this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightful is that it be cauteryized around, at the cautery called "circule", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it takes time to heal or because of the superfluous matter that it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of his temperament; and you want to hasten healing: then cauteryize thoroughly with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards, leave it thus. For it will hasten healing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you want to pierce the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with the form of which it is made:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery burns the heart, and it should be such that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the treatment is alleviated. After the treatment so that he is perfectly sane.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment by fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a decay of the limb, because it decays the limbs just like fire dries out green wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer from cautery with fire, then scorch the small and large cauteries thoroughly, according to what is suitable for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply cauterized oils with fire so that the burns from fire are removed, and all corruption. After the treatment of wounds that breed charcoal.  And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this decay has often been cured by medicine applied with fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great faulty thing that blocks the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It's to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery iron like a pen made of vaulted iron, and make it from good iron according to measure so it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and have subtle margins; afterwards put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it starts to rot; then make a poultice of crushed savages with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the foot of ointment, anointing so it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Here is the translation:
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling hands
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cautery; then the trembling will cease, and the health will hasten to recover from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	At no time appear by default the bad bodies, or painful pustules, that come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of fire, of which the point is taken with fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lenticular cautery. And at no time are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are dislodged the superfluous things from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and does not issue anymore; then apply fire cauteries more or less small and large as they are all red; then take, I., or big or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so long as the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that you remove your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not hit the nerve which is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stemmed except in one of the three ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed above which have power to stem blood; and let it be tied and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the blood by tightly binding with strips or placing things around, or other similar things, does not profit if it is not done nearly enough.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no miry medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly hold until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still with a cold compress often so that it may be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make an inquiry beforehand about what one needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here is the translation:
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the previous cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who aggravate their illness, they die quickly due to the severity of their disease, and the greatness of their malice; and one should fear this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather take greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not be fooled but be wise about what you are certain of, and about what you can have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have divided from head to feet, so that you find it easier to understand what you will need to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is known that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too strongly; and sometimes it happens due to a response that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen it hastens death; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth abandoning the work on some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head was so swollen each day that he could not hold it up; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it would be death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head overflowing from each part, and the water springs out when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not responded to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After holding back the folds of drapery and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give the patient dried and seasoned food in moderation, so that the limb may be comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and do it according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and take care to remove blood, so that the patient may die from the bad flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of the vein
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cautery with fire, which one uses to burn the affected arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, then, to cauterize the affected veins, so that the patient's head is relieved; after scrubbing the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient's neck is stretched out completely; then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are somewhat bent; then mark the veins at their roots, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument, as far as the vein reaches to the bone, and it should be done by stretching out the patient's head widely.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as two fingers' width at the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to sensation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of an abscess, if it seems that apostemes come from it, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migration comes, and acute pain, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and the cauterizations, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attaches to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is a little restored where some homes are too cold; and if it is restored, then hold the patient's neck with some drapels, then rub the skin of some rough drap, and warm the skin with hot water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula made in this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Here is the translation:
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vein with much cotton and places them on well-made tents; and when they are removed, if you are treated with dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healthy; and if you do not have a cord for the artery as you operate, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood does not stagnate; and if you do not have this present, if you put your finger on the vein until the blood congeals, and raise the vein of cold water until the blood ceases, and is held steady as necessary; and what is more moderate and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cautery the vein of this trenchant fire, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid staying too long on the sore.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the two knives, one of thick space, and then when you have signed on the edges of the two veins, and you put the burning iron so much that it comes just to the bone, and covers the vein in two places; and they should be separated between the two hands because it is not suitable for this cautery from start to finish; and this is the form of cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are on the tender skin of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit from a cure of medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel an uneven walk as if from tremors; and if they are worn out and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "conquered cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be thus, two inches deep into the forehead downwards just to the nose, and the others two inches costal by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are two inches costal by the papers above; and remove your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and let each wound have the quantity of two ounces at the joint crossing.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you shall prepare a piece of sponge and wrap it in cloth to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula bent at two inches from the point where it is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is to be made at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the cartilage that is between the two fissures to the entire siphac that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge towards the clear cartilage at the bone, and the dull edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mean fissure. And collect all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as much as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another part in the mean fissure up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and express the flesh for the taken blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and put on molled drapery with wine and oil and ash, and beware that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, loosen the lien, and apply great abundance of hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures that one uses for wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a patient has a familiar coughing fit, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision is clouded, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it hurts, and the patient is stunned; then know by these signs that those matters and this catharsis do not come from many veins, and the mother's cure is what it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one equally large. And begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then remove it between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and tighten with linen thread; then cover above with warm drapings soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to form hot; when it is opened, you must rub the bone so that scars begin to form, then apply treatments that excite char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flowers of chamomile, and three parts of colocynth, and make an emplaster; and apply it to these wounds to excite char throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the inflammation of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of these four things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing like iron; or seed, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not adjust to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little droplet of violet oil or sesamum oil, then perform extraction; and make the ear emit a flow of condensation, and stuff the nostrils when the emission comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and clear the ear from above. Many times it is cured by this treatment; and if it does not cure, perform extraction with subtle pincers, from which the shape is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with pincers, that's good; if not, perform extraction with subtle onion-shaped double hooks; and if it doesn't come out by that, make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or pierce into the ear strongly, and stuff what is around the cane with wax so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out in the form we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, take glue from where you take the ears, and put some instrument on point to do this, and put a little cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not succeed in all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus, that an abscess falls from the vein, and spasm; and the manner of the incision is that you first make a healthy wound on the head, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape out according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Here is the translation:
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus like a thorn and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel, then ease the extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms appear, remove them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is its form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it should be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the wax; do this often until all the worms are seen. And if they do not come out, stop up the candle with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come forth as we have said, ease the distillations that the old men have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from what is its form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be of silver or copper, narrow below and wide above, with small holes to distill; and to press within the distillation, an instrument of well-made copper for this, and if you see take a scraper and wrap it in cotton at the point of arrival; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand moderately so that the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it within, and it should be distillations a little warm at the fire, as one distills it in the ear; and take care that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or of flesh newly formed inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes go deep into the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole is nearly closed, and one sees them well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which goes deep inside, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, it is fitting that you put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, then the work has all this spatium of which it is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and even in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opilation is of new flesh or growth of the ear, then you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and gently shave around the area with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a tent according to the size of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the affected area.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not cease for a day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and apply the ointment in aqueous rose, and sprinkle powdered vitriol broiet; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another ointmented tent made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is gone; then continue to cure until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, soak a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bloody discharge which are treating the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papyrei (possibly referring to a type of skin lesion or wound)
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are without a covering, then the lenticular cautery is subtly burned, and the cautery operator afterwards incises vainly; and many times they repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are scorched and do not regrow.
de la gresle	of the crust
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things appear in papers of the eyes that seem crusty in their form and hardness, and for this reason this malady is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the operations are such: take warning if the grandine changes from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make a large incision, then lightly scrape each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing a little of the paper, do not grievously harm the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble it with a bandage, and cure until it be healthy; and if it's small, do not use force, for the ointments restore it quickly and enrich.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not harm; and when the grandine is covered, anoint the oily salve, and cure the place of that which enriches as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	There is a fat which is engendered in the membranes of the eyes above, and this happens more in children than in old people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have morning catarrh, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on them, and are their membranes under their eyebrows moist which the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinia that appears in the eye. And when you press your fingers on it and feel the exinia entering within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a cloth of linen, and sets up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinia in each part, then places it on them; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinia is assembled within the circle; then makes a small incision in the moisture with a sharp instrument, and does not make it larger than the wound made at the opening of a vein; and makes the skin deep enough that you reach the exinia; and in many dispositions comes exinia from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Draw out then a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the debridement, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and take care not to insert into the incision, that you do not reach the whole spatula just up to the eye, that you do not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, add a little to the wound lightly so it opens; then hold steady as we have said, then wrap in soft and cool cloth, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break their own skin and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is delayed. Then treat until they are healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat with poultices soothingly until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born misplaced other than by nature, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and cause various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to .iii. ways: either by fire cautery together with fire, or by medicine applied according to whether it is before or a chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick an entire thread above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above the entire paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, all the spatula coating, from the great lobe to the small; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then draw on the paper a figure of an inch, if like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper that is divided into sections.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a task that requires a great deal of paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make all the spatula coating on the lines that you have drawn, from the great lobe to the small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then prick the onion in one of the angles of the heart, and scrape it all; then assemble the lips at a stitching with a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the eyelids all things sticking together, if you see fit to do so; and if not, have no cure, then leave the stitching and threads for three days or two; then cure the wound without stitching things that are dry and constricting, because the paper revives suddenly from the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is putrid (as the ancients directed), and it is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and it is that you draw on the paper a figure that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three pricks of the razor according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this ointment which soothes the small equal forces according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the bandages, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread beneath the large artery, and the second thread beneath the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your two hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin upon which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a gentle ointment and similar soothing applications.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and it often happens that the hairs of the skin are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the skin and make it firm within according to what I have said, and then make artificial sores by art, and subtle threads as long as the skin and the width of the spatula is; and apply as many heads of threads where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what soothes the skin of the eye, and extract the artificial sores from the formed parts; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin which will be strained, mortified, and purified, until it will fall off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the scalp has a strong hold, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer pluck the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the hunt another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations are clarified, for it is a subtle and minor operation, then stick the needle into the entire hunt at the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as much as you can draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out entirely at the hunt in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hunt down below to all the thread that you had arranged, so that the hunt comes out entirely from the perforation above and that you see it through the vision of the eye; then pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for .ij. hours or .iij., so that the hair takes root in its place and grows again; and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with a long natural hair, and let it be elevated with the one you leave, so that it is elongated and then released.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes into the eye, it has two modes: one natural and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of operating on it is that you open the sore, and separate the lips of it, and put inside threads of flax, and lay it so it may be healthy; and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but working with mollifying things, as fenugreic; and the rose-water or aleatic and linseed oil being cooled, and ointments of dyapilon founded on none of the oils, and enveloping a tent, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed not to let it settle back into its original form; and these operations that we have spoken of are only temporary remedies for this disease, so that it does not return to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which is disfigured and truly named "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass through the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread appears in the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is convenient, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the papyrus, and make two cuts or seams within the papyrus; and let the heads of the two cuts be at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make them into an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is just like the figure of a letter which has no "j" shape; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are thus disfigured, from what follows the papyrus, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tinctures, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cuts or seams or cautery, it is convenient that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is presented here; then separate between the two leaves of a tente, as I have said; and one must do the surgery according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to understand everything so that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need of surgery and remedies in more numerous dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	you command of the blistering
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this blistering has taken hold of the hands of men in such a way that the skin on top is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the skin, and lift it high; and take pinces, so that you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too dull, lest the patient suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding oil; and make your incision, where you scrape off the assembled skin lightly, so that the skin regains its natural form; and it is healthy throughout, and never again becomes inflamed or painful, and raises the water gently, and of collarette; then put between the skin and the oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg whites; and after three days use gentle collarette and soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner of the eye is in two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but resembles a white, congealed moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and cuts it with pinces, it cannot be omitted; and both similarities begin from the great artery, and increase little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens their eyes; and holds the parchment with one hand, then coils the finger as pincers of small double curvature, and extends it above; then takes a needle, and inserts a horsehair or cowhair or beef thread, strong and firm; and doubles the point of the needle slightly and inserts it into the finger, and pierces through the entire needle, and holds the finger with a thread and extends it above, and removes all the hair from the side of the finger that touches the thumb and the nail just to the head, then cuts off the remaining part at the root of the arm, subtly and with small forces, and lets the natural skin or arm be, so that by incision no harm comes to the accustomed body; and never does the finger stay bent, nor at the thread, as we have said; then removes it from all subtle parts, this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the subtle part does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the thumb is not pierced; and after the incision, put a little of warm broth into the oil, and make a poultice from litargyrum, and let it stay until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured as much as possible so that it becomes healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the finger is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, many times a cure is made with medicines of this type of finger; and they are born as I have recounted in the division, and if you see them coupled, then open the oil of the patient, and take the subtle part lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the finger subtly, and if you see that it diminishes to a point and the reason is pressing, then distill from your mouth into the collier oil made of litargire and doucoliere rouge and broiet, and stop up to the other hour; then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it be entirely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil is contrary to you, as if an abscess bursts, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it be healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it be healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh is soft in the oil at night by great annoyance, then suspend it from the onion, and cut off a part but not entirely, so that no vein of tears comes; then distill into the red collier oil made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the prune
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Here is the translation:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all flesh has been removed, apply the oil of broiet or distillate of red colier and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton on the wound with a few drops of water, so that it be assured of hot abscess; and if nothing remains, and the blood flows excessively, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make several wounds in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering that work.
des voines des eulz	from the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away from the sight its work and afflict the eye for two years. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which the vein is, if it is strong, and there is no other disease besides this vein; then coil in such a manner: instruct the patient to put their head on your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the subtle double veins be according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be a nine-day delay in degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then subtly heat those subtle veins, and evacuate the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins being removed from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye at the points of the eyelids, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not copy the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to correct what is corrupted by the bad slime.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot heat all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is alleviated and is assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine according to what I said before, and it is not healthy, if there is an abscess in it that you open on the aposteme, where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take all the instrument of what is its form; and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made into a chief with an iron instrument, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the bone with the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is released; and do this several times, then restore the bone with exciting medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowels is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not apostematous, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the perforated nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with bitter medicines, and when it is uncovered, take .i. forest according to this form, and let the iron be at 3 angles, and the wood should be softened until it reaches the chief as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then he puts it on the patient's arm where the messenger is, and holds his hand away from the eye, a little, then turns to the entire forest until he feels the bone and the patient senses it by this, that the veins come into his nose if he holds his hand on his nose; and then applies the dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes tender and hardened, thus goes the matter to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor any diminution, then you must read the patient; then anoint them, then apply cupping glasses or a heated iron to suck out, then put on the eye .i. making a poultice of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply bandages and drapings; and the way of the drapings is that you take fairly soft drapings, and double each one in .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then strain with a hard bandage in the form of a circle, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye strained day and night, and if it is well-bound, then you must tighten it very much; then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, that's good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapings and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the rupture of a woven fabric ulcer
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the rupture occurs in the web-like skin, then it opens up, and a flux of resin-like matter appears, which is astonishing to behold; then if you see the copious flow, the treatments are such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected part just above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the affected limb; and make them pierce, leaving the first needle according to its disposition; then take hold of the limb with the double thread and tie it around the web-like skin, holding it well, then remove the needle and place it on the moist eye in abundance of dew; and let it be until the threads combine with the skin, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and often the wound is restrained by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends into the eyes, and enters there at once; then hold it steady until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	the veins of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the resemblance of veins in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce; if you operate according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, facing the light from the sun, and hold the healthy eye steady and very firmly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or in your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument at the crown by the thickness of a thread in that white spot of the eye on the lesser part of the eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and twist your hand until it pierces into the white spot of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the space which is from the prune tree up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you see the opening in that paper through the clarity of the woven fabric, then put the instrument just where the vein is, then press it one way after another. If the vein descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a little, and if the vein rises a second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the vein a little of that gemstone, and remove from there the eye within. Then put aside for a while the eye that is clouded or troubled with oil of rose and in abundance of egg, and bind it with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our kind, put on common broiet with an abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep in front, but make it subtle, then put the maggots, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient as if they are sleeping, while they sleep on their back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light food, and do not move their head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to their disposition until the third day; then unbind them in the same dark house, and test their vision, and make them see no things, and then put them back in their bed until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the time of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, because the water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	The abscesses which come, you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address that which soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on its frame .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made a fire cautery with maggots, which draws out water, but I never saw any of them in our land, nor did I ever read about them in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them walk in darkness; and they should be properly aligned:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of the bones of this same subtlety, and the last in four equal angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never born or nose flesh joined diversely, because there are none that seem scorpions at the end of feet; and if it has flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In this way of those soft fleshes which is not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion to those flehes, and burn them with fire; then hold what you can sustain in a subtle spatula on one side, until you know that this flesh is completely ostee.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and without overwhelming it, or abscessed swelling, drain it as needed; and if it's malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stagnant and all the flesh is destroyed, then pour out the pus and the watery fluid.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose does not open, and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as needed, know that there is new flesh in the upper bone, although the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary that you take .i. a thread of linen a little thick, and be careful with our hands, and have between each notch of space .i. an inch or less; and put the patient's head in the thread of his nose as it can breathe, and treat in a fragrant manner until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth; and many times children do so in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we are with the thread. Do this until you know that the notch has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nose a cane of lead for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where they distill oils and medicines in the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a cane, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a close cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease grows on the skin above the nose which is called "telul", and it increases and becomes large, so that it appears as a visible thing to behold; and for this reason you must apply a cautery or burning medicine at the beginning, and remove all hair, then put the cautery or medicine on top; and if you delay applying it until it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of dark color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can apply it all over, if you heal the patient and remove their fear, and cure the skin with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cauterized and burned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be aware that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilaginous growths, it profits little, for in some homes. It is necessary then to make a cut where it has happened to none, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then add the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure until it is healthy; and if the leaves are already dislocated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrub all parts of their skin so they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense bruised; and put on the powders a piece of strong or another soothing plaster, and let it sit until it heals by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of treatment is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have within their lips an abscess hard, resembling a grain of corn, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and divide into each node, and take them with pincers and cover in each part; then apply the remedy after the incision of vitriol ointment, until the wound is stained; and then leave it to heal, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it happens on the gums that are affected, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with bandages, and apply a dressing to their root, and let the blood or fluid flow; then put vitriol powder or other drying and desiccative powders; and if that character returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return again after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	of abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they gather at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are wide and spread out; and sometimes the black, citrine, and greenish teeth are corrupted, as the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you hold the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws be in your care, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus deal with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, until they are eliminated; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to rework on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for reworking, according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasps that one uses to remove teeth have other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you, well-prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay to handle it as soon as you can, for this should not be done quickly; for it is a very high substance just up to then, so one has no excuse to remove it hastily.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Here is the translation:
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it into each part lightly, and remove it as you have done before. And if the tooth is perceived and gnawed, it is necessary to fill it with pellets; where the holes are; and if you hold it subtly in the grooves, so that it does not break while holding it; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and re-injure the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pain than the first time. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have related; but they come to an end through the occurrence of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is decayed, you rinse the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, you apply the place with vitriol broiet; and if it does not work, you cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which one uses to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so that they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the tray, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be toothed to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the tray, it is necessary that you put on the moist cotton cloth in a burrow. One day or two days, until the roots are softened, then you apply the clamps which are called "algefri", of which the head seems to be like a beak; and let them be made thus, as if they were a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to issue forth from all these clamps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it be far and large so that it does not break mine, and if the root jumps through that, it is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one aids with this instrument that has many grooves, from which the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it be these instruments far so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are certain diseases where the ancients did not teach at all about the diversity of instruments; and it breaks no doubt in the cartilage or in the other bones, or it putrefies, if they search for these instruments that they need, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, from which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and shut; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body shape, and its form is ugly, and especially in small women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot align or file: then take the root; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron agitated in water:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take the file little by little in your hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file, then file a part as it is the shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and file the tooth little by little in your hands daily gently, so that it does not move until it cuts; then plane in the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they bite strongly
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when the front teeth bite strongly, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on them so they chew, and you treat them with constricting medicines, and that does not work; if they need to be restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold one does not move at all; and let the middle thread not be too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double it between the healthy teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so they do not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then cut the heads from the thread with a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy teeth, and set them so they do not obstruct the tongue; and then leave them like that as long as they can stay, and if they come apart, or the gold thread breaks, hold it together with another thread; if it stays in place and serves thus throughout its entire length, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the healthy teeth, and the bad ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, set it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not interfere with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth from an ivory tusk, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it together as we have said, and let it stay and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of burning the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes it is the ligament that comes from under the tongue by nature, which grows in this way; or by accidental injury of a wound; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head steady, and lift the tongue; then burn the nervous ligament of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is toughness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the onion and burn the large ligament; and take care that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the clear rose water and vinegar, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and tie the patient each night, so they cannot swallow. And if a flow of blood comes, apply a vitriol ointment on the wound; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see that the color is foul or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a white color, and there is moisture, apply an onion, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not stop with your operation, apply vitriol ointment until it is staunched, then return to your operation as much as you need; then lift the clear water and vinegar, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Here is the translation:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You should press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the handle, and make a hole above more than you can; and make no noise with the tiles together, then cover the instrument, because it is the shape, that seems like forces; and always the head are curved, and one end to another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument handy, then cover it with tannacles, because it is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting from one part, and naming the other part; and when you have covered one of the handles, then cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and warm and soothing, and if blood flows, then gargle the patient with warm water, or apply crushed pomgranate seeds that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then cure until it is healthy; and no other abscesses occur in the throat except for the .ij. handles, if you cover them thus like the .ij. handles, I mean.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, which was a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed .ij. roots through the .ij. holes of the nose. I hastened to do something, and placed an onion in one hole, then made a hole above, and extracted a large amount of pus; then I did the same on the other side of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I placed the onion in these abscesses, and covered part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the hole that I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it and placed a tube inside her throat: thus the crossing was delayed; and I parted from those regions, and knew only that God did something about it after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the vein is beneath, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called a "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme swelling is calmed, and it is subtle; then you must cut it. And the one which is assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, then you must make the incision there. For there is great danger for the patient.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in it have an instrument that cuts according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads should be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapour rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, it often recedes, until the eye dries out, and take care that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do it further than at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a feather's down into the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the feather's down does not let the vapour pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether, safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens that a fish bone or a fish spine gets stuck in the throat, or something else; so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly; and what does not appear and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and attach the thread to the sponge, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then extract further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument with a hook according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instruments be at the top of the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest it all comes back, nor push the bone inward; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because it is better or the thing is easier; if you push from below, where it draws the entire instrument equally, as long as it is drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the hollow of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is suitable for the throat, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit at all, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the hollow, draw it out completely with a small hook, or subtle tongs that are suitable for this. And if it is not successful, take a curled hair, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert or move the curled hair with an iron instrument, and make it happen often. And if the patient complains of water all day, then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it swallow in its own time, and move it with his own hand often; and if you soon feel that the hollow feels the water, then pour.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not pour out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with absinthium at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the uve; do this many times, for it will soon flow freely. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cover in the middle, and in that pierced hole let there be the head of the instrument; then you throw out the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue forth, but comes up to the hollow; and the hollow will flow now, and if it does not pour out, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that it flows freely through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, resembles curved tenailles entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many abscesses are similar, according to what the memory brings here afterwards in this book, and they diverge in perforation and in size; and it is in three ways: one is in its own appearance itself, and because of the moisture it holds. And the second way is through the eyes or those that are on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its fulfillment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crude, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are on joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and you leave them until they are porous within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is on a principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is mild, it will harm the principal member; or if it is on the foundation, you should pierce it so that it becomes mild; and it is not necessary to pierce a crude abscess without complete digestion, unless it is on the foundation, which does not become porous within, and becomes swollen, and a fistula forms; and one cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and double debate and settlement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and so the perforation is throughout the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worthwhile that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, then the body will be filled with a great deal of putrid matter; and by chance they will harden the lips and the depths of the abscess. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to the size of the member that has need of it.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where wounds come from small abscesses, and there are ways of ours that are in tiles, just like the joint of a thigh, and many have similarities. There is fat and flesh where moisture accumulates, just like in pustules; and if there is flesh that is hard and piercing to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not contradict it. And the work of the surgical operation is that you examine everything .i. instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes later, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then clean thoroughly under the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving behind the skin that contained that moisture, for it returns immediately if one leaves it; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in vinegar and in wine, and in applying the dressing, and leave it until the next day; and this corrects what has been delayed at night. And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay at night; then treat the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it may be healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. fat, then cut according to this form, under the length; and remove the outer skin, and scrape off from all parts, and put all your cure into forcing out what is in the vessel where it lies; and if the artery contradicts you, then do what I have told you afterwards. And thus do with the abscess if it is piercing, and from the touch and from treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the surgical operation on a piercing abscess and moisture, is more gentle, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or wounds where there is no moisture, and from these .i. abscesses that I cut into the head of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a rotten stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had made a hole in it, one would have done as much harm as to a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head, because those that come from the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, the operation must be done within three days at most, depending on the patient, to avoid swelling; and the treatment should be done as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these ulcers occur on the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin, and never on other parts of the body, and they are numerous, and they are interconnected with each other. And each ulcer is properly situated in its own place, just like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and do not want to obey health. In this case where you see good disposition on the touch, and it seems like the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not airy as nerves from the neck nor in the artery nor in the conduit, and is not deep; so you must cut through above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the two lips of the heart as oncinces, if you are a master, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and proceed little by little, and be careful that you do not cut into the nerve or the vein, and do not let the spatula fall, so it does not slip, and do not go too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not let you operate, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, so that you complete it; then inquire about your finger's indication if there remain small ulcers, if you cut them out and treat them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, do not think that you should cut into that ulcer at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harming; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire ulcer, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no further superfluousness due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and treat it forcefully, and sew as we have said. Those ulcers that hold superfluousness, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce thus like before mentioned, depending on the situation, then apply ointment and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well treated, cure it with ointment in a warm manner, so that it becomes healthy.
de squinance	of bruising
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it's the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have bruising, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglote" be examined; and one should not help by this alone, because all the veins and the purging of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the loss which comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it deep within three circles or a small incision across, between the three circles or by the quantity of the deep incision through the siphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if it is necessary to cut at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be removed.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then cut the heart as far as it reaches the uvula; and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the siphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the uvula's flesh that falls apart due to the broken ligament, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with sweet care, and sew everything beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Avoid doing this just as much as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the defect lacks the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore command the old man to let the open wound be so long as the evil of the disease is past, and it is past in 3 days or in 4 days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they command to cauterize the wound and cure, until it was cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of the forearm;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called for by the curator, and I found him nearly dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered with a vein or a pipe, except for the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I had nothing against the young woman except that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural does not have any obstacle.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is in two manners, one of which is similar to a fat tumor that comes from us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate with fiery fervor except in the one that is small, and it proves and searches everything intrinsically.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus, as if it were a fat tumor, and it does not penetrate to any vein, if it is cut, if we cut ourselves, and it draws all its cofinement, if there is a point in it.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine everything thoroughly, and heal it thus, so that it may be perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I declare all the differences that exist between them and us.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the patient is feverish and trembling, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putridity is accomplished; then the fever and heat are restored.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the ninth node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a certain syrup, which is its own juice and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a jaundice, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their appearances, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire into all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of the nails is that you take or touch the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the heart, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this that it knows how to force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the running moisture is short, whatever its color may be, thus make it so as I have said about other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fat, thus make it so in a cross, and take it as pincers, and lightly scrape each part and ward off the cloth where it lies that you may draw it healthy with the nail.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he remains nothing, thus returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he remains a little, and the wound does not grieve him, thus apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing abscess remedies hot, and heal other wounds as much as he is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is great to us, thus cut the lips of the wound, and heal those that injure flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is swollen against the contrary or other, thus hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol broken, and let it stay three or four days, as long as the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which is remained from the above.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are like the needles with which one cuts the abscesses, and are of citrus iron, or silver, or copper, and those that are yellow are worth more than black lead for encircling the ulcers of fistula;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and are in three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three ulcers of three manners also;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are lancets that have three ulcers, and are of three manners; and if there are lancets that have two ulcers, and lancets with a single ulcer only, and are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is sharpened to those who make them cutting, and there are those who do not cut more than one part, from which they scrape the nails, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introjected instruments are the lancets placed in handles, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use them more than in the clear flesh, as in thighs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and one often makes another small instrument similar to a fisting scourge, according to this form, with which one stains blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one places it sometimes at the healthy spot that joins the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes one encounters according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes they swell the breasts of some men when their corruption begins, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they become worn and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if one knows how to treat them according to this form of these lines up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine of incision in the form of a cross, then bring together the lips of the wound to suture, and treat until it is healthy.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and the flesh falls away below, and is amazed by its greatness as if it were women, if they make in the same sutures above, through similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one holds onto the other at the end of one and of the other, so that the larger line includes the smaller according to this form, from this line B to line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it consumes the residue and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the seats are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Here is the translation:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire boil that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply gentle pressure to make it healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is open, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses come, and it also happens that the inflamed vein becomes an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes it thus, as it is through the artery, then the abscesses are long in depth;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangulation; and when it is through the vein, then it appears as a deformed foreign body;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to hide this abscess, and similarly when it is under the seats and in the corners and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to remove the iron cure, and the one who is at the head must remove it also, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever, they make a incision above the skin of the loin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the incision nicely, and separate beautifully the artery of the veins, so that it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then locate the place which is between the two ligatures of an intramuscular one, so that the blood flows out of it, and be freed from the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that heals by degrees, so that the ligature holds fast.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal those of dislocation coming to those, as long as they are healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess throughout all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, if you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts with a thread, as the two heads of the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, so rebury another needle everywhere, the whole aposteme at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four directions;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the aposteme so that the superficies emerge, then cut the superficies of two courses and let what is linked remain;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of tents and bandages until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nostrils
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it often happens to the joints and the two toes where there are joints, and it's a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of dead flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts a piece of bone, the patient feels pain, and it's not like the depth of the body, but beneath the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it must be well examined from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and one who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: by chance they would contract;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin soft at the suture.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, you hold it with tongs, and cut into its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, you support it with an onion, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound to the suture, and heal until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	the large hanging pouches
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never has it happened in the belly and not in another part of the body, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it is a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had an ulcer on his belly that was more similar to a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and it had little roots, and it was already cracked open, and it was corroding from excessive moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I touched them and found in one sixteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the works of the incision show that you examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when the surgeon comes, there are often too great effusions of blood, and if the wound does not heal, then hasten to give a secondary cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient is fainting and afraid of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread of wool, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it sixteen days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain, and do not cease from straining the thread of the probe until it feels the joint; and it works by itself without labor; and if the roots are large, then you should not be afraid to cope with the middle of the belly, but you can well cope with half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not touch the ulcer that is of bad color and little sense and laid bare regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or crack of the skin, and it is on the stomach and in some of the veins, just as it has happened in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the vein, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers, it swells up, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he should sit comfortably between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go within to the place that you have signed to all the spine.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then stop the majority of the abscess above all the large ulcer;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind it within with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and be the nails tied securely;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open the majority of the abscess extended above the nail, and you should indicate with your finger, and examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you take hold of the patient's thigh, if you dislocate it, and insert the intestine through the hole in the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you take hold of the bowel, if you take it to the navel, and cut off the excess flesh;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery does you harm, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and insert nine strong threads, and insert the nine needles inward so that you have made a cross-shaped incision;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb rest until it purifies, and cut away the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when you apply the cup when it is subtly heated and purified, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and bind the limb.
dou chancre	because of an ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the symptoms of ulcers, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment with iron; and we say that the ulcer is inflamed in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in the limb or where it can be touched if it is like an ulcer which is in the flesh, and in the skin, and in similar limbs, and one must completely remove it when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I do not know how to heal anyone; nor did anyone ever heal before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is inflamed suddenly; and one should not touch fire in these .ij. similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy called "inflamed" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as tumors and solution of wind and similar things; if you do not touch fire, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and they have no other disease except dropsy alone, and it is not too young nor too old, then you should work thus.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly inwards, bending the water to the lowest part of the pis, then take the spatula-like instrument according to this form: And let it be trenching .ij. parts at a point, and in no way should it be so entrans that it cannot come up to the intestine when one administers it thus, and it does not block it.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision thus from the bowel .iij. straight down below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side of the bowel .iij.; and if it is due to the spleen, then let it be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient's juices flow into the weak place except through the incision that the superfluous ones do not run to that weak spot.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Here is the translation:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top is the almond, if so when the instruments come to the water, then descend now onto the instrument; take away there the half or the third part, because if you remove more than it does not fit in that hour, by chance the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he becomes numb, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but take away according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and their pulses; then touch the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cord which stops up the passage that is on the syphon, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take away from the water a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do it no day, and guard against making a fool of it as long as it does not remain but a little water. And if you doubt on the patient, and you leave much water, if the cure of the burial or dry heat, and by very sweet or bath and in the sun, and take care to drink; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Here is the translation:
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, afterwards the head of the rod and the handle are aligned as the length of a pen, if it pierces in the middle, as it should; and beware of the flow of blood that often comes, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of what bleeds, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the pustules on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a bad appearance of flesh; and in them there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle onion, and cut and clean all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment carefully until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, so you must apply cauterization. When you have cut it, and if the cyst is on the rod, and has part in the skin and part outside, so you must remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is softened, then cure what is outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the head of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into his rod and groin; so you must clean all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the scrapings of pomgranate seeds and veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the flow of blood comes, one should apply the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries aid in eight dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood and at corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must insert or conduct a tube into the rod, and pierce the patient through; and when the skin is rough at the head of the rod which has not been circumcised, either from a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a .i. instrument curved, so that the threads are disentangled, and the head of the rod is freed on all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with a .i. spatula around the head of the rod and the skin; then disengage it gently between .ij., and place .i. subtle drapery of linen on the moist spot in cold water, so that it does not become rough again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not teach circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of my masters and wise men who performed circumcision in the name of Dal, and with great force, and all at once; if it happened that they cut through two veins, and by chance if one touched on this one above and stayed below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mundification that comes from Dal it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mundification of the ankle by chance the iron slips, and corrodes the vein, and many times they do not have mastery of mundification and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mundification that is done with great force on all the thread of filament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Here is the translation:
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Here is the translation:
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapery of glue made from a mixture of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with oil of rose and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment until it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be twisted and should be cutting, and the heads should be as large as the equally measured main.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the cords inside are cut at the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch to your finger, so that the veins make an abscess; and the equal measure, and if you cannot hold with your finger, then take the measure, and then bind.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and gently remove the scab; then bind as you can, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou retenement de l’urine	the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of a bowel, or of a new wound, or of similar things, that we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not evacuated, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, so it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of the back, and strain the patient's effort as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine is evacuated.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", which has this form: and it should be made of subtle silver, lightweight, like a bird's feather; and it should be the length of a palm and a half, and it should be subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or razor, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and remove the superfluity of the lancet and insert it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then put the syringe lightly into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod above towards the bulb; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the voided thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduits or it goes astray; then stretch the thread throughout the entire lancet little by little, and the urine follows the lancet, then it is evacuated, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and reintroduce the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and alleviate the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or pus comes into the bladder, or where it is gathered, and you see distilling sharp waters and medicines, thus make all the instruments which are called "forceps", and this is their shape:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leeches suck because the medicine should be such that it stops well the flow of urine without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and purged when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the head of the irrigator in the moisture, and pull out the flow that is inside; if you draw out the moisture with the irrigator, and then strongly re-insert the flow inside; if the moisture enters, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the shape of a subtle syringe with which one irrigates the bladder: it is thus.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below, at the .i. breast or the ligaments ache; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clog the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the shape of a double thread, and heat .i. pocket that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has just arrived at the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys as rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cutting edge; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	Here is the translation:
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a clyster, because all the filth that is in the intestines must be removed. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move to the back of the bed, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it often falls from the high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the urine flows downward entirely; then seek and touch inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone. And if it does not yield to the touch of everything, put your right index finger of your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and insert it into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, press it against the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you saw fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand hold the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cut is made; then he inserts the spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between this which is between the hip and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides are equal or fundament, and let the cutting be so that it is wide by default, and inside is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	by chance the press if both sides which are on the fundament, so that it does not feel heavy work; and know that there is some part of the stone where it has angles, and edges: if it is rough to come out; and if it has a part which is under, similar to a pebble, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	At that point where it has angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with the tenaculas which are like a file on top, so as to remove the stone without breaking it; or you place underneath the subtle curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if the sense is deceived, then extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there are more than one stone, then place the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract it, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, then you must make a bigger incision, and create a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out again because the wounds cannot close; but in any case, make an effort to extract, or to break up the tenaculas, as long as you extract it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, if you fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a dressing of soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resolve the patient back onto their bed, and do not untie the bandage just yet for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, if it arises very well the place of oil and water, then treat with ointment of diafinicon and ointment basilicon, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and so retain the urine, which is known in such a manner that without sound with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then lift the wound with water and honey and silk, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the sores that you cure, that you tie the joints, and assemble the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is led by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot exit; if you heal what I say thus, that you cut frequently, it is excused from the cutting through this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Here is the translation:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take the thread and insert it beneath the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron rod in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can perceive the stone from another part; if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis. If it breaks thus, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then put the filigree beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod straight in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract the flux, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to conceal herself, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well how to perform in this art with hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper cut, and great fear has to do with it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and hold the true faith on, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle gaze; and she presents a well-known remedy in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to feel her bottom or foundation and examine the stone; and if she finds it, if it presses beneath her finger, and recommend that she presses her finger or with the patient, and squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder in form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves gradually from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let the size be at first small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the rule in the size, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. if you know the similarities to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood does not come out, then put on the vitriol broth, and hold it for an hour so that the blood is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes forth, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools to help you in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if he lacks sense, it is from the artery that is cut, so put powder on the wound and hold back the tentacles and bandages, and do not recommence this, and let the skin heal and do not touch it again, lest the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are quiet, so return to your work, until the skin is strong.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is beneath the skin of the joints, that contains the vein; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the vein, if one thinks it is another vein; and it is the skin of the joint between the white syfac that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this limb is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it is expanded into that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, because if it's white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, .i. a short time like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and because of that one thinks it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sifac, he feels it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should test all the inward parts thoroughly, because its form is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the inward parts, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat them with iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should be placed on his back, on a high thing, and much drapery should be put beneath him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he should sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs near the joints.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut into the skin of the joints within the length of an inch until you reach the white spot where you pricked, and make your incision straight in dividing the skin of the joints up to the subtle scar that will form.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then apply your onguents, and the white spot will be above; and do not touch the joint's core, but only the white spot; cut out all or piece by piece the subtle costal tissue of it, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the fluid flows out in abundance, then reset it to its place when you have completed the evacuation of the fluid from the white spot; then assemble the two leaves of the joint's core into a suture, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the corruption of blood; then cut into the joint at all the suspended places, and remove the fluid, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if it is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part just as you did the first joint, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moist ointment of rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another moist dressing with wine and oil, and put on the two compresses, and put over them doubled drapels, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two drapels, and fill them with lint dressing according to this likeness, and they are assembled by sewing into the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the shoulder; and the other two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the rest of the structure in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is the medicine of this cautery of fire in the height of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery instrument, and cut the skin of the compresses, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the aqueous humor is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take fire cautery according to this form, and pierce the skin thus in an inch, and scratch it with this subtle burning cautery method.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the cup in all the ways that you can, as long as you scratch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the removal of blood, and make worse the operations of the tailor.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and do not do anything that makes it worse, whether an abscess bursts or removal of blood or something else, if you heal what makes it worse, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horribleness, then hasten perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the water is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remainder of the pus, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and let the white cloth not allow the pus to exit through the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you apply a pen or instrument with which one treats the pus of dropsy cases, whose shape is seen before; and enlarges the wound, and knows that the pus returns, and is assembled after 22 months or an entire year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in more than one disposition, because it seems to me that many things are worth leaving.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise to the seams; and it is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known through excessive sharpness and anguish, which is spread to the seams, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are painful abscesses, green and red in color, and sometimes they come from a nerve, or from an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a nerve, it is recognized by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not think that you should touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from an inflamed vein is recognized by its disposition and the expression of tenderness to the touch of the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well perform the cutting on this similarity, and on the other scars;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the joints, then place the egg whites above, and remove the white crust from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already mixed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the crust, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all that tension, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the back is behind, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of millet oil and rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the thighs
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like wrapping resembling a pustule, with the softening of the thighs,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient must be gently moved when they walk;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this illness is well prepared just as much as previously,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a elevated chair, then apply the suspensor to the joints below the two thighs,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are near the verge, and prick the masters, and stretch them out strongly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut to the spatula-like instrument, broadly traversing the area where the vessels are, until they are discovered;
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vessel where the vein was seen, and then tie it again to the other vessel;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then they take the cupped hands directly, according to the length of the body, and in extracting the corrupting moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as others do, or inject a poultice, so that no vessel bursts which nourishes one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this, there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the treatment of the Syphacia's disease
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disease are through the cut that comes from Syphacia's disease, or the extension onto the belly in the part of the groin, because the intestine descends from that treatment to one of the hips;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this treatment is from Syphacia's disease, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes arise: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a fall, or from lifting a heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is an extension of Syphacia's disease, are that it comes on slowly and gradually, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses equal up to the fontanelle, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and it is due to the issue with the intestine and the body's weakness from the swelling of the intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained there, and causes great suffering pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, fear is born, because they think they will escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to insert their finger into the wound to feel with their hand inside if they can re-enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on their neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the joints from top to bottom.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the lips of the wound uncinated according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the white skin that is beneath is uncovered on all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second skin,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the skin near the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and dislodge what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you find that the intestine is wrapped in points or white skin, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Here is the translation:
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then they gather them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and in lying down the symphysis, which we have said is beneath the skin of the joints, with a strong bond of .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then they envelop the heads of the veins, and lay them in a formed bond of .ij. parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them cannot enter into them, lest an abscess grows there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the bandage according to the first long .ij. inches of that, and after these .ij. bandages leave the symphysis which is beneath the skin of the joints a great width of an inch;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg produces; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as long as the vein runs, and the bud, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then anoint the affected limb with oil, and apply a poultice, and anoint the ligament as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a white wax that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to fear of blood flowing out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens often, and leaves the ligament as long as it chooses for itself; and if it delays in healing, so be it raised with warm water, and apply what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done in the same way as the case of the shoulder which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you bind the veins, after cutting lightly underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of those who have a tumor, until the veins are clear; and treat it in the way we have said, so that it may be healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Here is the translation:
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always if it stays too long at this point, so believe the wound or swelling, as much as the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the swollen area which is like a abscess, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and inflamed the joints and opened them;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by fire cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is made with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then cup the hand of the swollen area according to the quantity of two fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the skin that is beneath the skin which is swollen, then take the rod and place it above the apparent skin of the swelling.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press on the perforation of the belly, then cut the apparent swellings of the swelling above the head of the rod, and cut one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the rod, and do not touch any part of the swelling that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the obstruction of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the threads, if it is wounded and heals the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphac is constrained, and has no appearance in the treatment, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and to cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and heals the thread.
dou chastrement	of the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I know that punishments are established in our law, and for this reason I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so except in .ij. manners: one of which is that the masters respond when asked, and heal; and the other, because we often need help from punishments of certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say therefore that punishments are made according to .ij. manners: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in warm water, so long as the thigh is mollified and pendant; then take it in hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel it. Of the punishment of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each hole with a .i. plug, when you have well scorched them; and leave none of the subtle flesh that is under the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more moderate than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something often remains by chance on the thighs, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Of hemorroids
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hemorrhoids are in two manners as follows: one is when they occur between the buttocks, just like the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes they obstruct the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and they have them on the pubic area, just like a rod with buttocks.  And the cure for men and women is that you treat the affected areas entirely, and the treatment is like for other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine flows back through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tendonitis
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendonitis is an affected area on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It's necessary to remove the excess of the tendonitis from your hand or fingers, and treat it lightly; and don't put too much pressure, lest blood flows in, then treat with another treatment until it's healthy; and there's another sore that appears at the mouth of the marrow, and swells, and by chance it bursts forth, and is similar to a cowe, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". It's necessary to treat it, just like we said for tendonitis, and the treatment until it's healthy.
de erratique	of a rash
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the chest
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come to the chest, such as cancer and pierous abscesses and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak of the hot abscess that comes to the chest, which is not among the abscesses that take hold of the bowel; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe how the abscess is agitated at its beginning, and full of choler and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a low seat, and have two small seats or he leans against his back and assembles his feet in a way to form a right angle with the leg; and his thighs are expanded, and puts his arms under his knees, and ties them well with a linen thread; then suck up the pus from the right side, and introduce the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the chest, so that afterwards it takes form; and it is necessary when you have introduced this instrument to fix the ruler first in order to know the depth of the chest, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go further inward than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the chest with draplets, so that the instruments do not grieve him; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand mol, it is necessary to cover at the top, on the spatula of the lit; and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you put ten moillies of oil rose, or green oil; and put the tent under the wound at the depth of the chest, and put by way of the chest and the patient's nettle in water or malves being cured; then cure afterwards for two days of ointment coming to this, so that it is healthy; and no time lift the chest and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and aristologe long being cured; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is repeated in the chest, it is necessary that you guard against burning with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes to its chief by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and raise her nature of oil or fenugreic being cooked, and then put the bath between her two little spatula-like fingers which form its shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and bind the second one, and cover her finger as much as the moisture that is in accordance with the running flow; and press the womb of the woman until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clysterize the woman with a musculary injection of fenugrec oil; then make her take and expel with consent, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus now the infant is born.And if the two hands are strong, then you must gently guide them little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet high; then remove the chair from the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall at the descent; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cover the hands on the counter which is placed beforehand, and extract the child, and reset equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the issue of the infant upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, then you must support it high up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then he turns a little by little, so that it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the feet and stretch them a little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it is adjusted just to the knees, if he commands to grasp, and makes them stretch with consent;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it turns out well, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not stay as we have said, if it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not stay as we have said, take a mixture of alta, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the natural place of the woman within and remove this joint,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then make the patient sit in water up to their ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened underneath, have them gird with myrrh, and apply it underneath, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make them sit on a chair, then make them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and gently press their belly, for they will soon be relieved.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands there little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then he should be laid on his back, and his feet should hang down, and he should be leaning on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he should fold his hands little by little, and then he should press his hands on the belly, and he should lift the cushions from below, so that it is prepared from above;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not stir, take his feet and move them gently, then move the belly above, then he will put out his hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and hold the infant little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold of it as much as the infant allows.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child who comes with a hand out widely during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to guide it back with the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot guide it back, then make the woman get up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If it cannot walk, make them sit on a bed, and bend their legs in shape;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then anoint the muscle that I have touched;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not improve, make them sit on a chair, then study how to move the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and guide the infant according to its natural shape, and make it straighten up, and instruct that it takes hold as much as the veins can be strong.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the exit of the child upon its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that you should take his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift the water lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is aligned, place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold of it; and make him straighten up.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner to all the secondary
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes forth in this manner to all the secondary, if you cut the secondary at your finger, as long as the moisture is evacuated.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and the veins appear on his face and neck, if you cut from the bud, so it is not retained, and kills the veins.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it is fitting, and command the woman that she not take it again.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then he must straighten it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the dislocation of the twins (or twin joints)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twin joints are often born many times, and sometimes not at all, two or three; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens little.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live, if they have little name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, that it should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the bundle;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and none of them issue naturally like all those under us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and do it thoroughly and lightly what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it thus as it brings health to the patient.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Many times they are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, and are all formed into a child's shape by the measurement of the glorious wisdom.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is fitting that the healthy one knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	thus he does according to what he thinks is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and there is no accident or she has fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be inclined downwards, and her thighs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister touches the thigh of the patient, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not slide down towards the end of the bed;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the marrow with moist oils of walnut and of fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and muskiness.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then put them in the marrow lightly, then wants it to be set where it puts the onions that are suitable for that.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that the veins are prepared so that they descend onto their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you touch the patient's eyes or his neck or his mouth or his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is upon his feet, touch them or prick them and at the same time the sides of his waist;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the needle in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend his whole hand lightly, and prick the needle into none of those places that we have mentioned, until he comes to the voided thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the needle:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then make an encounter with another onion, or the third where you are in this profession, so that the extractions should be even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then it is set in motion equally from one side and the other, to make the muscles issue, and so that the nails hold for a long time, if this is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it remains in one part, oil the bail with some of its fingers, and apply them to that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it does not remain in place, put this nail or higher up, and do this until it is all fully seated.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be reset because of the straining.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth, so long as it is entirely covered;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the bandage at the joint of the foot or heel, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and similarly for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child's arm is large and it is twisted at the joint, or it has an acute gathered head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	it is necessary that you put the spinal splint between your two, and make the head and extract the acute.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you apply the instrument called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus it is necessary to make them into a great natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones as if they were tendons,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and the head jumps for and holds to the forceps, if it is broken, so much that the moisture which is or comes out for;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot exit, then you cut by sections at the muscle where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the administration to the mouth of the morrow is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strained in the belly or at the chest, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and apply heat to the belly or the piss, as long as the moisture that is there corrodes;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are affected, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if you thrust your hand into the front of the marrow, and draw it just to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then you thrust a lancet or two, and draw them forth;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the skin of the thigh is contracted by a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be treated,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then it needs to be treated with moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the treatment is with emplasters, and thus in watery softening and moistening treatments.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it evenly, then treat it as we have said in the case of a living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and one must not have power if the treatment is carried out piece by piece, and do not leave anything of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, remind him of what we said about apostemes that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood comes out, it should be placed in a warm poultice, and remind him of other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension, the veins came to a head in the body, and swelled so much that they opened, and began to great suffering.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long tension, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster of attraction, and it drew out a bone, and after some days others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished, because I saw that the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound and manipulated the bone, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I felt the woman's pulse at once, and immediately applied a little poultice on the wound;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I didn't forget this chapter because of that, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	you should restore the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the presser, which you will find in the books; and in the twelve turning heads of the twelve ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle on the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the shaft be one digit in width, and the margin of the trees should be thus, and from a palm and a half in length;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the midst of the limbs let there be adjustments of this same fist, which should be fastened on one and the other, about half a palm's length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and that adjustment is placed in the mouth of the hammer to open when one turns the limbs corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, in its more subtle and lighter likeness, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the clamps;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and have the limbs adjusted, as you see, a palm's length long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you want to open the marrow of the entire instrument, thus make the woman sit on a litter, her feet pendant and legs overturned,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two adjustments adjusted together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to the entire instrument, just as you have done with equal tenons, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the bile does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have them paired, so much the more hasty is the opening, and the higher the homes are according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument if you have not prepared it, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained at birth, then you must instruct the patient to hold their wing, and then make them stretch out their condition, and hold their hands to their mouth and nostrils.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let it burst forth by itself, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it does not, take the pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the disease, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or put in water over the fire; then place a cane or pierced pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it burn as much as the vapors come from within the marrow; then it is strengthened, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second (joint) is quickly dislocated.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not become feverish, then instruct the patient to move their left hand in the oil of sesame or in the muscle of the thigh, and then put it in its natural place.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek the second (joint); and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not break at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it is necessary to move lightly to the right and to the left, and then to treat; if it comes and becomes dislocated again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted, we have said the treatment of sternuation, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into error in treating;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment of four herbs;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if the patient is purged and restored, and fever will come; but always, when it persists so bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one treats the woman held by the retention of flowers and of the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similarly to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tinder until it is burnt, and begin with another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not received a thorough examination, thus it has been stifled by subtle symptoms.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary then to apply a poultice that it penetrates the subtle symptoms with its finger, and does not touch the spatula-like ague, and covers the location so it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not restore, then put or apply a poultice of pounded herbs, and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes these sudden swellings of wound or abscess come; you should cover that swelling suddenly: if it is cured, if we have spoken about the treatment of a stab wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and it is worse when they come from beneath the deep foundation, or in the space of the two parties,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and encounters moist heat or subtle white or thin swelling,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and often these fistula patients are; and are known by the fact that they have indigestion or flatulence when the patient makes indigestion, and sometimes they break wind suddenly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they extend just to the joint of the hip, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fistula patient by the foundation, and not by the external appearance.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if he has tortuousness, if you put a subtle probe of a horsehair, or a horse hair, as long as you feel the probe or the hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from bad pertussive digestion nor windiness nor vermin, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate further; if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is adjacent to the bladder or adjacent to the urinary duct, if the urine flows out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the tendon comes just up to the place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain inside, then it is that it stops immediately, and no medicine is effective suddenly by anointing.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the foolish doctors who intervene are worthless.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his knees, and has his knees bent towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you then feel that the tent has penetrated; and be discovered where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is perforating;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should totally avoid that one can heal some, but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the whole hot thing in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these cauterized wounds are scorched, which resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of many wounds in a burr, as long as that flesh becomes firm, then the treatment of jointment by making the flesh sound and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is thus healthy, it’s good. If you see him, otherwise he cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger that is at the bottom, and place a thick covering of flesh or skin between your finger and the holding, and you see the fistula at the one who teaches the covering of the finger;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you touch the beginning of the fistula, and push ahead before holding, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the holding will be delivered, and it will fall apart; then I will show you those withered fingers that resemble a bird's claw, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you feel faint, and shorten between you and the vein, then cautery of fire or medication of water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery assembles these things: it is to know, the burning of these joined flesh, and the drying of blood and the reduction of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of many wounds in mud or in rough cloth, as long as the wounds ooze pus, and they make the flesh raw in the pus.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the joints suddenly with dry herbs, and these are the dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the font of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire into that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the string or the syphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut near the font, or if you can place tente and cure as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too much in depth, that you do not touch the tenderness which holds the foundation, and come to the gestures by the voluntary sense.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you disengage that covering and the wound then that it is touched at the foundation, or by tension or by another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I will show you that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and to maintain the fistula in the part that is opposite the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tension into the fistula, and it is where the costal bone meets the foundation beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tension perceived at the head in this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I push the twisted thread into it, and push the tension on the whole thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is penetrating in the margin of the wound's foundation, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you touch your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the thread through the flesh, and assemble the edges of the wound together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no more than once, until the thread holds together those flesh parts that are between two, and heals;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	Here is the translation:
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it is not suitable to make a copper cautery for the patient unless in extreme cases, and then the treatment, as we have said, until they are healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine is spinous where one makes a fistula, it is much more agile than one, partial and piercing.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one does not know if one should not operate, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Here is the translation:
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there are one or more, they are lacking foundation and at the bottom of the foundation; but those that are lacking have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and yet they have a bit of citrine water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a bedchamber, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and hold it as in tenails, or you hold it on your finger, then cover it in its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them back with their gums, take them to the drapil, or to a cushion, or to a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and stretch them to your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure with other cures until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient of piercing and bitter cluster with a gentle flow, so that it may issue openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient feels pain, and their veins are far from good foundation, then it is a light cure;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or with pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you treat the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and pass it through a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too loose; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one pore to correct the excessive flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the foundation a drapil moilliet in oil rose or in cerote, and place on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it be until they heal, and when they are healed, if the cures of ointment and other cures, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you should scrape the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is scraping of veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary to put at the tip of a spatula or on one's fingernail the scorching above, which does not allow it to get moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal as long as it is swollen thus as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be soothed, then recommence the rubbing more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and is scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal as long as it is healthy.
dou fremit	swear an oath
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small, false appearance beneath the body, and it goes much deeper inside.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it as if dead from fear, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a vein of a wing of an eagle, or a strong wing of a vulture, and place that vein on the fear, so that the circles encompass the fear entirely around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand to the whole cane as you grasp everything entirely around the arm, and put it in the foreground, and scrape the arm of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make it in the form of a cane of iron or copper, and be subtle underneath and pulling above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, then cauterize the arm, as it is before or in chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never do we make aclyster of silver or copper, or of tin foil or maillet; and never do we use these small and large instruments, according to those that are entrusted to them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then, which are used in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large aclyster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there is a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has on one side .ij. perforations, and on the other .i.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it be the belly or womb where one places medicines of a bladder of beast or parchment, and it be pierced all around with small openings,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and have between each opening a space of a thumb's width, then put in these openings strong thread of twisted thread or cord, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that's the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then put it in lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the surgeon instructs his ministers to join their hands together, so that they are entirely visible, then extracts the scalpel, and lifts the patient's legs to the bench,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he takes his medicine wisely, as much as he can; and if he sleeps a night away, it is more great aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give him a clyster for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue forth, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as possible, like for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the subtle clyster upon which the skin should be held back:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the manual and medical treatments, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword or a knife, or with a lance or a stick or an arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound is situated on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the abscess's levity: if you make it healthier by the cephalic remedy meanwhile as it comes from blood of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the naval part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to recover, let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, abscesses that come, cotton moistened in rose oil or in wine steeped.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, apply to the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he has been injured, place him on some pillows, so that he may be comfortable.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as a sword or similar wounds, and the lips cannot be assembled by tension, so assemble them by stitching, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it is deep, and only holds on by a little, then cover it; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore the hard skin in place of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as boiled and roasted meat, also like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a skin wound, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut around the entire wound, and apply force, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, then seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it off with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; living chalk three parts, and powder subtly,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and fill in the wound, and hold it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and let it not become unbound, so it does not inflame; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time does one make a poultice of hot water solely, when one has not heated the blood of the dragon's scales, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved the wound, meanwhile in this state, then do not put any of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply them to certain digestive remedies, or poultices made of wheat flour and water and honey, so that it throws away the pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal through other treatments until he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then I would use subtle pinches;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound of the dolorous neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and the dolorous head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are injured.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, if there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the nerve substance is cold, and its connection with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in warm water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other mines according to this manner, and apply moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bands, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick it or below the level;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes, then it is opened, and the ligature, and the cautery, which is their profession;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the ribs, and the conduits are guarded, because the flesh goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the rib on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then strain it gradually, and leave it for some days, then cure it with ointments and unguents until it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if he has made an impression on the bone, thus the wound;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if he has pieces of bone, thus the broken fragments you can remove, and those that you cannot have, thus let them be until the wound heals;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it be disinfected and aligned with the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, thus powder on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment follows as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow from a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has taken on a putrid condition, because you will know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a ligature that does not penetrate deeply.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and look at the body, and observe the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put an attractive ointment, and apply it several times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have ointment, put much cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound several days, two, or three, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if it does not come from a spasm, nor evil tremors of the heart that are signs of bad alignment;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal then the wounds with applications and other treatments, so that they may be healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and becomes an ulcer, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is done as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, either on the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, so examine the wound, and remove the false fibers if they are detached.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not detached, let the wound putrefy, then ease the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The disruptions of the belly are great and frequent and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound often the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, which prevents the intrusion of aus;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more painful, and often it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one puts back together the inner parts, so that they are not repeatedly dislocated.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return to their place,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it is necessary to soothe the wounded belly, because one must reset the intestine to its place, like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common stitches have an incision in the stitches of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitches for other wounds of the body and these proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more suitable with the stitches of the belly, and I will describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestines are outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and this thing is to reset, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	by the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is frozen, warm it up in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Here is the translation:
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	where you burn with a hot iron and cautery and branding,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and scorch the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and many times they make these veins retreat, and it is wonderful that one heals by removing the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation departing, then anoint the intestine with hot or cold water and evil humors are cured,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	because by this it is aligned the entrance to little of thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument with which one collects the humors;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to soften what is hardened;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut without great necessity there is;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the instruments for the wound:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut deeply into the curvature and do not dig further, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it according to its natural shape in its own place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	Here is the translation:
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is on the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If you set the head and the foot higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and thus the rupture of the wind in one of the lower parties
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you set it in a way that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus you must minister to what I say about great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Small wounds put this in order that it appears to you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then hold it between your hands, I minister piteously which draws the whole route to his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common manner of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound, an inch of space, and I fix a needle or where it has a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with the skin of the siphos,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and gather the nine chief veins which are called siphac; gather them together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then stretch a double thread within the needle of the vein, because
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather the nine heads of the wound healing,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let the two fingers of space, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then let the thread of fire thus as you did the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease from doing this according to what you have mastered with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be the needles subtle, between fine and coarse,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those too large cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for it is necessary that they be blunt;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and soft skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not take in and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the heads of the veins so they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I hold tight or wrap around the heads of the veins to keep them still,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn up;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because he suffers from a needle or a puncture wound.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second pain is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you gather the needle-pricked heads of leather and the needle-pricked heads of skin together into a single point or where it has a strong, firm thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these heads all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch follows the bone,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that one had on their hand or belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a blow
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's breadth large,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was about twenty palms' breadth of intestine,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I will return the intestine, then it has been stopped for 23 hours, forthwith.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and it was healed, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal at all from the ointment, for I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a remedy with more pressure on the wound cotton often many times a day, and the washing of honey water as long as it was healing.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and sew the part that is deficient just up to that inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart in the right way, if you have sewn the head of the siphac or coustit or where you have sewn with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make him pierce from another part of the inner section up to the point of failure;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew them thus as the tanner makes the skins,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave once the seam of one part, and retake from another, until the treatment is fully accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of treatment, which Galen describes properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	it is thus like any spring, which naturally assemble the injured parts together.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one head to the other head, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	fix a needle or a head of a mirror close by, and make it pierce the limb slightly.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the injured heads come together;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through the weak part just up to the inner core.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as it is the head of the deep wound;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make a piercing on one and the other side of the weak part just up to the inner core, in other heads of the deep wound that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Here are the translations:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or have thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is a more grievous wound than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus it seems the artery has moved,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder soothing flesh,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and it seems the artery has moved, if you put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and they pull the thread, and are sewn the suture, and the mirror;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with others, until it be healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, much cotton,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and remove it twice a day until it be healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you do not have another kind of medicine for many types of simple wounds.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary that you moisten a light linen cloth with oil of temperate warmth, or with rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the joints, and beneath the soles;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or pruritus in his belly, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they clysterize with red wine immediately, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it penetrates within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is by the plaintiveness of the veins that they are, and by the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to their natural disposition.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the stitching bursts from the wound, set it back together as in the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turns towards green or black, then you must lay the black place that corrodes the blood which comes from it,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the nail
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the eyes facing the part below the wound until it befits to alleviate the extraction when the wounds heal, and the wounds close.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the swelling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one cannot restore it to some joints,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a spear or a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus caused the evacuation and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I go to cure according to what I can do, and did not cease from subtle treatment until he was healthy, and the eyes were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had no evil in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no point of evil, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take firm hold of large clamps, then assemble the lips of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the clamp has opened its mouth, then place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it stretches its mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then the scalp is cut, and this holds so that it cannot be dislocated,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then apply another fringe afterwards in the same way as before, so that the wound is entirely covered.
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head becomes stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in such manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestine filament that is very loose,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then attach it to the head of this subtle twisted thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of cauterizing of frenzy is not otherwise than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal passages, if there is no ingenious remedy, unless subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or where it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is shaved and made numb.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the true notation of a hard and white abscess, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also shaved like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it appears clear and numb, and other times dense;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes a little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not outside one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, by the small loss of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	for his wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	for because he has hard skin within, and on the lips, which does not allow any flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the pus is stagnant, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because for that reason the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where by the property in the region it is slow digestion, and slow health, and naturally inflamed;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is fitting that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	where at the spleen, or at the intestine, or at the bladder, or at some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or at the spine of the back, or at some joint of the hands or of the feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens that it comes to the ownership of the main limb, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is an ulcer that does not heal until it reaches the place I have described, and you are confident in your treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you examine it carefully, if you take a thread of iron or copper, the ulcer is straight, if it is circular;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the ulcer is twisted, seek it out with a subtle thread of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the leads bend back into the twist;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and you should make a fistula at badly perforated places and you cannot search well by feeling.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you touch it with one of the perforations,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it suppurates;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should examine it with your power, so that you recognize if there is bone or nerve, and it is separated by the fontanelle;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, if the treatment is according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the decayed and rotten flesh that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healthy
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut open deeply, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I apply gentle poultices in medicine agar, and the buds just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is remaining at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he puts ointments on his wounds, as long as they are healing;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healing through this, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut around it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is not causing grief to principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if his skin is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let it be treated until the decay is completely removed.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the things that are wounded so much that they become healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and rents a gap as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not at the same level as just now:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you discover and seek as much as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to an end;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if it has a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with a suitable instrument for that,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, so extract them all, do not leave even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes you counter, there is no error or fear
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it grips and moistens and fleshes, and releases the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot dislodge them for an hour, then put on the wound a poultice causing purification,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the pus is purified between the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have lighter bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as of the thigh or shin,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you remove so much of the corrupted flesh that the blackness is entirely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the body corrupted, it comes just below the bone of the shoulder;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to open and cut just up to the corruption, and then to treat until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you take an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man of around 30 years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and had no way to evacuate by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the physician, in their foolishness, operated so much that they opened up the abscesses,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and in corroding many materials, and it became fistulous, and there were many perforations that all gnawed away the moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many times I mirrored the cure within ten years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured it,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which corrodes through the perforations in a large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I thrust a tent into one of these perforations, and then I searched all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some veins come against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I watched what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, because it is what I saw.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I started again, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and I watched it, and then I examined it, and I thought of healing the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I do not touch it as much as I grasp around a palm of the bone, and I make the trajectory right on its whole.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and freed suddenly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it is not necessary to restart the work forcibly because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot bear it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For because of the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely healthy,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard lump formed in the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither in going nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take the ligament, and stretch it to the head of the bone which opens,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command him to extend it high;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another bandage of a larger size than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the head, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from underneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see the sore, so that the sore does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a thin layer of cotton or a tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to probe thus in order to see and feel the corruption, and to probe again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover the entire flesh; then put a thin layer of cotton underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then the decay spreads from one part to another, and is the decay of the length of the corruption, a small piece, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the decay is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and let the bone or what it contains be from another part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the decay is in the continuity of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut off;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the decay is in the hand or foot, it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but you must inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and examine it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not contradict you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and the veins are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will have mastery of, according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and it bears witness to the ways of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument which you have mastery of, according to what it needs.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head collapses either because of a cause inside or because of a fever.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have applied the medicine to that corroded place through the treatment with medicines, and it does not improve at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you should amputate that limb up to the level where the corrosion comes from.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If the patient is weakened by fear of death, or by spite, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it corrodes one limb after another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes over the whole body; if you hasten to cope with it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and it is through the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the finger joint, thus the cope, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, thus the cope at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, thus the cope at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there are no better remedies than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and you should do it in this way when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it takes hold after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, it takes hold of the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then it takes hold at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and it comes above the knee, if there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cope or to soothe the limb is that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister below one of the ligatures, and another minister above the other ligature,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures at a spacious interval, so that the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then take the cup or basin, and place a piece of linen, so that the thread does not touch the healthy skin.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and let it come to the patient for another wound and abscess ulceration.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood flows out when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then let the numb member recover with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will count as one who had a similar wound:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first into his finger through the wound, so that it took over the entire finger;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man sees the decay, if he hastens to cover the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and soon after, the decay returned in his hand, or in the other, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I applied things that rebounded after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosions;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I covered his hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to recover the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubt also that if he cuts off his hand, it will not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was feeble; and he despaired totally, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he ceased to coop up his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not known any account of those who were better than what one does elsewhere, so that one has mastery.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does a abscess come to a head swollen with charcoal, and stays for so long that it makes a large collection of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and clears the eyes' sight, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets of a cloak,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not corrode nor just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called “fistula”;
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but since it is so prolonged that it reaches just to the bone in the front, then it is called “fistula”;
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so thin that you can see the entire course of the vein, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a delicate sheet;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not differ due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the cluster thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look at the sinews which are large, and the abscess that comes from them is of foul odor,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then the clustering of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Here is the translation:
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	as long as the medicine is red, and it becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take some of it according to your need, and make it into a thin liquid and into honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cleanse the wound with it, and hold the opening steady;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay on for two hours, then wipe it off in a sprinkling manner;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the breast is exhausted, and the pus is eliminated.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and none of those times is it cleansed with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of vines, and pour water over them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then strain it, and cleanse with it, until you know that the breast is well purified;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash of cinders
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if they purify with water and honey or have a little bit of litargyre crushed;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	where you purify with honey and wine mixed, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the healthy ones strong;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the senses are well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you cleanse what makes the flesh grow in it,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cleanse with certain medications and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the perforation of the breast is small, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you widen it with a iron a little, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or ointment of balsam, until it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it so slightly that the cane of the lancet can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if you pierce where the swelling is above, whether it gathers here or lower than it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the swelling is in depth, do not let it grow again there;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cut beneath the skin thus as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	it appears in such a way that the swelling runs to the lowest place it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bowel is perforated, if he does not let it suppurate therein
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat below as if you saw,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	it appears in such a manner: that the bowel runs more lightly downwards, and leaves nothing of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to put on the seat,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stand on the drapery of the loin that covers the whole back;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then gather all the strength in the right place of the back, i.e. a little larger than at first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then there is a gentle pressure on the other drapery according to the quantity of the back,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the back of the back to align the bowl, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the pertussis of the breast, often opens by opening the mouth,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows that which runs from the mouth, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digests, or does not digest;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed of the patient's sensation of pain or name, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the pertussis of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	Here is the translation:
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislocate it in the morning, or the third day, and when you dislocate the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if it changes, I will use another dressing, and renew the binding.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses are troubled with indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if you feel subtle pains in the short term after long tension, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because health is approaching. Because there are men who delay the healing of their wounds, and those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel is indigestible, it knows how to overcome the pain after many days, it knows that the breasts do not stray;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts delay healing, and are sluggish, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as we have mentioned before, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last resort medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a treatment of yaufinite, and they make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine in equal substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then they confit and use it; and this same mixture makes cooked honey thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when yaufinite treatment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then glues .I. a bandage, and he stops it over the breast, and sometimes he administers to an Aristologist a long time,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the sky-blue, which is as if flour of times and hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you know that corruption is deep-seated, and it makes an impression on the bone, where the hard limbs are, or the sinews;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the finger nail, near the joint of the hand.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	where you tread, or where by chance you are born with other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess comes to the heel,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and throw so much that they run over the root of the ankle, and by chance they run it entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come the ulcers just to the bone, so that they bring painful hurt, and it is the head of the wide toe, and its color is dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat them as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous flesh which remains on the finger,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterizations are great help if the bones are sound, and the finger is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if he has an ulcer on his skin, and it begins to point, and the blister,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it is necessary that you put the right remedy under the ulcer that points to the skin,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and apply pressure from above, and touch the subtle and delicate skin,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remaining skin medicine burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds until they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut into it, and extract fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the decayed tooth, then cut into it, in the same way as it was said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must soothe it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the thorn-like growth that has grown in a crosswise direction across,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the cutting does not touch the flesh which is beneath the thorn-like growth, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it has happened, then put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain which comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born in the hands of certain men by chance are completely numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance they have a piece or a bone, and sometimes they have a nail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in none of us two fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born with a defect of their finger do not move it,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who are born at the joint of their finger, perhaps move by chance;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of one who is withered is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Here is the translation:
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or has a hernia in the back, it is necessary that you first take hold of the round flesh just up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then take hold of the bone at a suitable angle for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come in two ways come from birth, or from sudden injury, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you take hold of the dislocation, and that the bone is reset according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two warm tents or oil-soaked cloths, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, as long as the joint is stuck, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you apply that sticking as it is necessary.
Des vils	Of veins
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	You see gross swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they especially occur in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry heavy loads, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary therefore that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the sap of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they are burned, and another treats the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is to open the vein, and to pull out entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg of hot water very strongly, so that the large veins are made subtle.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg of the patient down from the hip just to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, with a large incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then he releases and draws the black blood from his hand, from one vein to the other, until as much blood flows out as the virtues of the disease can suffer.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then he lies down, and orders that he be fed on rich game and black coal;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommend the evacuation and the bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of it are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then put him in a bath, and let the swollen leg be cooled down until it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the knee, or in the part below the joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein of that part, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as if a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then apply the remedy underneath, so it lifts the skin from the raw flesh, and then place it on the lighter side of the wound.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cover it in another layer above, with two inches; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then leave it to settle, as you have done, and place it on another ulcer, as you did previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cover with another dressing, or more if you have mastery of it, then leave it, and cover the toe of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Here is the translation:
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull it back and lift it, then he will stick a needle everywhere, fully, to double the thread strongly.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and pull and pull, and he will stick below, he will sew, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it holds.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that it does not swell, for if it swells, one cannot pull or lift, and harm comes to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have fully pulled it back, then put on the wound a dressing of millet flour in wine and rose oil; and treat until he is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if his sight is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that you bend it straight, but do not cover it yet; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that one uses to cover the sight is curved, and does not cut, so it does not touch the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the shape.
De la voinne civile	About civil veins
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, in hot and dry regions where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps grows elsewhere besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that lies beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, growing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then it changes the veins, and begins to make the vein issue forth, like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to the nail, and the neck,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the cloth remain on the leg, and all the times it does not fall off, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the nail;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is fully exposed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity or ulceration, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because it is necessary that it be treated little by little just to the head, and nothing remains there or in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is not often that this vein is treated with five or ten pounds of longitude, or of X.;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one hand comes to me, on which it is seated from ten palms in length, and when you take hold of it, if you prick or pierce, and it perforates just to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes from many perforations, and where it jumps many times; cure the wounds thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cow's disease", because it often affects cows.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it feels like a good sensation when going from member to member, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and it bursts forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is generated by putridity of certain humors, as if they come from worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot do more than when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	it is necessary then that you read the place above and below with a strong and well-tightened ligature,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the tract further, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire above, as long as it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that he does, if it is that he runs to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or approaching near the eye, hold your eyebrow firmly in place, then cut above, and remove it completely;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is suitable to use the patient's purification of bodily medications through dissolving medicines for bad humors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of rotten meat causing putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more painful than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little after, it corrects throughout the whole body, so much that it comes into the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it returns again to the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease according to this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen many that had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not understand what he wants, as I saw it in a woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this, it seems that the constrained wind appears;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I did not appear to follow this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it reveals itself as we have said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the disease lingers above and below hastily, and then presses upon it until that windiness constrains it to its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those who expel windiness, as with foul pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Arrows.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they stick.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and smooth ones;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have sharp angles, and those which have length, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which falls onto a member if it falls according to seven ways: or into a principal member it divides,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore into a place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	then it is necessary that you take care of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in more severe conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply implanted, if it pulls, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the symptom of the brain when the arrow head lies there and pierces the bone, and removes the swelling which is on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there is dimness and swooning and vertigo in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perversion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and it jumps from the white moist wound resembling a poultice, and it jumps also as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and in a black crust of blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Here is the translation:
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that does not reach the forearm is that without swelling of ecchymosis bursts from the wound, and the throat becomes swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and feels cold to the touch.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great alarm and great pain and breathing; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, perhaps it bursts from the wound with some undigested food matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead remains in the belly, and it bursts into the intestine through a perforated route, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels severe pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joints and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do the same.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man whose arrowhead fell or was stuck in the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touched it, and pulled on the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without sensation numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pulled on a vein that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the vein was reset, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the bottom of the fist,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was a large vein of a Turkish bow, altogether I felt lighter without earrings; the game was without sensation, and no bad accidents happened to me.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And apply a poultice to the throat of a patient, and it was an Arabic poultice for the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beards, and refined them as much as I applied the poultice, and the patient was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I applied a poultice to a man whose belly or stomach was swollen, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and I extracted it, and I made a hole in the vein, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow fell out or back, and the wound is sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains within him, and does not change its natural positions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he lingered thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And they extracted an arrow from the king's prince's man, which was stuck in his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the treatment after it had been fallen for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a pricking pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the patient a plaster made of attractive and digestive ingredients, because it is not inflamed.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I appear to remove the arrow from the wound.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster in the morning, and I resolved the wound again, and then the patient remained in bed for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow, that is, a day later, in his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I apply the cauter to the wound with a corrosive medicine by gentle touch, as long as it was opened.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow that had stuck in the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it went beyond the limits within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then scarify if the wound is where I applied the tourniquets, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease from subtilying and engineering in ways of instruments, until I took them; on the next day I had the tourniquets well made,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may translate it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you put your treatment on those things that I do not say, for the books cannot take everything in.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those things that are present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find a new work, and a new instrument, for the discernment of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from limbs or they are not fixed unless in seven ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the hole where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that jumps forth from there where it enters, it's an arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not heal now, let it be until the flesh is porous throughout, and the issue is cleared.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move a little each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it heals, and if it does not heal, pierce through to the bottom with a subtle sharp instrument, so that the flesh inside is enlarged, and then draw out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I mentioned appear to the patient: if they do not treat it, but let it be until it is even after several days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for then the swelling comes just up to the eyes, that's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the swelling does not settle for fear of the bone being damaged, and does not come just up to the eyes,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains several days without bad accident, if they do not receive proper treatment.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very fixed in this way and cannot issue forth, if I administer tareres around, as I have told you; then cure the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, one seeks to remove it entirely.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the injury is great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow head what holds it,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if there is a piece of flesh that is stuck with a splinter, examine the muscle where you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can draw it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and you should carefully handle the arrow so that you don't break it, and you handle it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't at one time, let it lie until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you do the opposite, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision near the nerve and vein, and take heed how you can safely extract the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	where it is burnt or scarred, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form it was in when the artery cut into the skin.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest help that it be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The artery that comes from another part, where it reveals none of its things, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	cut then thus, so that the ligatures can take hold, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot exit, let it be still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out forcefully;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is stuck to the arrowhead, cut around the entire shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the shaft breaks, and you want to administer a remedy, then administer an instrument that cuts.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the tip of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrowhead is hairy, apply it to the instrument with a pointed entrance, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrowhead is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it converges.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to emerging, and you can touch it, then you touch it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your profession;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and you see the shape here:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many methods: large, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the swelling is also like the feather of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push at the point of the arrow, as if it is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs to push and to extract if it is so:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds, 21 in number, because it has eight main ones.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: two veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins;
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and there are veins which are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the base of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the little veins which are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the little veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and they want those which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is called the left side by the common people, and they call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the mean one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call the common people "vein of the heart"; and the royal physician is stationed on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call the common people "vein of the belly", and it is above the pubic area,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is that one which is sacred, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saphena vein is the vein which is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left ankle bone on the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the wound, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck at a single glance,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	so that the two veins appearing behind the ears in the two lumps depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the fingers reach your back, and where you feel the pulse beneath your back, it is a sign of an abscess;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein above.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well. You must make two traversing incisions, and cause the blood to flow out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold it back and let it go, so long as it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	Here is the translation:
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and he is accustomed to, and the habit of constantly shedding tears from his eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and he feels a lump under his arm, and then it signals an abscess;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift the heart up onto the vein above your finger's guidance, and insert the lancet beneath,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein above, and the scalpel, just as you have done in other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then dislodge the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply a cotton pad;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form it strongly, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their treatment and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The sanity of the forehead vein is worth as much as the sanity of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the diseases twist their neck in torquing, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then instruct the patient to remove the collar, and lay the vein so it is healthy and never swollen from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp; and the healthy part should be crossed, because the bone is near, and by chance break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and at the forehead, and at the eyebrow, and at the oriel in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is that the patients strain their neck by twisting it in no ligament, just as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the sound, and let the healthy part of the traverse be a little thick, a little long, a little wide flame, for there is no point of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then lay it on a cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The healthy part of the vein of the birth if it is worth having a good purge, and a strong forcing, and a sickness of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as in migraine and redness that comes into the face, and similarly when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the health is such that the patient strains his neck, then he stretches his nose to his left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and takes a subtle flame long, and fixes it in the liver in the space that is between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let it flow too much in depth, and make the blood flow according to need, then leave it a night, for it is almost completely restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and it's the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The knowledge of the twelve guinders helps with the strengthening of the wing, and at the beginning of messeliness, and for many illnesses, and for impetigo, and for corroding, and for herpes, and similarly;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the knowledge is that the patients stretch their neck one way and another, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and so the masters are established on the head of the patient, and the patients sit on their seat;
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then bleed the vein of a finger somewhat widely, then draw out blood moderately, as much as the master is.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the veins moderately open.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and let it just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the lips is affected by decay in the mouth, and corrosion of gums, and cracks in the lips, and painful swelling and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and examine the veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that they have small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Here is the translation:
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Here is the translation:
De la sainie desoz la lengue	About the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healer is that the patient places their hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine one and the other, and do not go too deeply in front, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the skin which are commonly wounded are wounded in several ways.
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where piercing everywhere, it is a flame burning widely, or a subtle olive oil if it cuts through the skin, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame burning widely is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with flat, broad needles appearing full of gross blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and that's the form of the olive-colored flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The clarification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, aids the illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to proceed carefully, and he should beware of the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not be piercing the flame, but cutting as if with an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no vein of it, where you feel in his hand the vein within the arm: it appears manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cope at the flame anesil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to recognize the hand of the wound, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the hand as much as you recognize the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the hand of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and cope with the vein of the flame anesil;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, for it is an artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	wait then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be afraid of the pain, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not treated, and it gets worse, and the medicine does not present itself to you, so cut open the artery, for the head of the retreats; and treat the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a bandage of fisting, and bind it, and take one of the joints and place it well just next to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound is treated, that's good; if not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the treatments are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possession of the good union of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The bloodletting of a vein is so helpful if it draws blood from the top of the head and below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the bloodletter to be aware that he should beware of the nerve which is below, and if he pricks too deeply, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it becomes inflamed and the health is harmed, and by chance it cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and it is necessary to open many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you loosen the instrument's sinew with skill; and avoid loosening the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the muscles, then they make it flow far away.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The wisdom of the cephalic (head) helps, because it attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to know how to prick in the olive flame or in the Martian flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Here is the translation:
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when one does not do it for the first time, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not diminished unless it is protected by health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the healthy vein be made in one of the four veins that are or are touched: it is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basileptic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of taking goods from someone, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 10 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding which is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but only when need is felt, whether by day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus less than four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor do they advise to cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that he purge his intestines with a light clister.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much retained filth, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not heal quickly who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk, as long as they are feverish, or dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it worsens on the sick one after a passionate collapse, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiple labors for a woman, and of traveling, of watching and of fasting, and that which destroys all virtue, or by something of the arm or of the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtle are the humors, if the blood is gross, through meat and through drinks and through medicines, if you have a weak power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then between or bath, no thing does not deflect, to make the blood subtle.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you sting with the vein of the foot behind the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you beware of that day of work, and of pointing, and of dislocation, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be joyful and happy, and let the veins be higher than those that are stung, and rub the arm twice or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sense;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then he rubs the joint with his hands until the veins swell, and he feels it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then he anoints the sinew with a little oil from a small flask, then places his left hand on that vein below the joint where it hurts;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as if they were strings on the sinew, and if there are such ones that are full of windiness,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If when one puts on the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the haste, if the vein is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vein is swollen, and the patient's condition worsens, leave it two or three days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	by chance we will come across abscesses wounds; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then pierce the same perforation at all the right veins;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and open it a little hastily, so that the eyes are not inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the health, and put a little of warm oil on it, for it alleviates the pain of blood, and is a remedy in this vein where the oil is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same treatment makes threefold and swelling of eyes, when one puts it on the place; if subtly the sense is divided when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there come big abscesses, which have occurred many times, similarly when it is not healthy unless at that time or the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened with water and in a warm heat, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green discoloration, then it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some kind of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance occur at the wound of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the soft place sensitive to the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for perhaps it will cut without an artery; but the master makes a splint to straighten the place, then cures with another cure, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And let each one draw blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that one should make a larger wound, and the flames should be large.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is more suitable to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled in a transverse cut, not in a puncture.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of health is saved from decay of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the health which lasts a long time or a short time.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a soft poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is heated, then draw out three or four times the blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of a cold complexion, then anoint before the health with a soft poultice made from syrup of muscat wine, or from aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it is wounded in health, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef, and subtle, fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use of other things that we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to escape with his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to escape with his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong course, if he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, if he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated, and it brings about fever; if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the perforation as far as it reaches the peritoneum.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you observe all the signs of health, and place your hand on the patient's pulse when they are healthy, so that death does not come into the peritoneum.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary to see the arm being dislocated, and to make the blood issue a second time, and the perforation is closed, so that you press firmly upon;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if he is curved, he stretches out his arm quickly, for it would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him stretch as long as it takes to heal the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is congealed in the opening of the vein issues forth,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it on the small piece of silk, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it too much, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding is necessary, then let the blood flow from the same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy at the level of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of the healthy one is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fistula becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy one now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the perforations be large, and let them be very close to the joint of the hand, and if they cannot issue forth, then reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow out into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not reset the hand in warm water, for one puts it more into ice than in this state;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is better than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger of the right hand is good against all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Here is the translation:
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is across, and if you cut it completely, do not grieve anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too deeply in the fontanel, because the nerves are very close to the bare skin,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot issue.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out enough blood as it is necessary, then put on the vein oil and seal it immediately, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand on the left side is worth more than the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the spleen is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	like diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain goes away as if in warm water, and bursts forth on the vein so much that it perishes.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and he puts it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many ways.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	it hurts there where the vein is larger, or at the ankle, which moves more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you hurt above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the vein of traversing as in a cupping motion; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the veins cannot issue out, put the foot in water, and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the veins fail at first, start again from above a little, for the blood is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt about nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the shin of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic vein are at the thigh of fire, and its vein is worth the pain of the hip, when it's because of hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its vein is that the patient goes between good or bad, and extracts above the thigh .iii. two in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you will know in all ways that you can, and by crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth more that you take care of it, for the joints are sound, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then know that there is no vein that opens or gives two toes, and towards the small finger, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then loosen the bond, and put on cotton and bandage; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The hairs of a warm poultice
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Poultices are made from horns, or from iron, or from glass; and the poulticing is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this poulticing that is without pricking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and the poulticing that is done by pricking and by extraction of blood is done in 13 ways, according to the laws of the body.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	when one of them is all asleep in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling on the ribs;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cupping glasses of the jaws; and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small scattered veins that are dispersed in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this one does not become accustomed to it, as one does when making a vein healthy;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not suitable for it to be administered, nor at all by fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to ventilate, or by habituation, we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each season;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to wait for three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this waiting is in place of the health of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not suitable for one who is of a cold complexion in use, or who has a cathartic, because that causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it is not suitable for the weak ones who have cold illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often hurt themselves in this way become numb, and therefore it is suitable to apply the cupping glass a little lower down due to fear of numbness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping on the neck is in place of the sore head and the basilica, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the pis.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and a bruise, and a replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to caution, for it holds too firmly, if there is an inclination of the stomach or chest.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings are like the ribs of the spine if they produce pain in the head, and obliqueness and migration, and in the constriction, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to press his hand to put it in place, so he does not touch the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings beneath the chin are like a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations of the scapulae are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventosations of the joints are worth as much as those of the three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon that he should not make too many incisions in the font, for the veins are nourished by flesh, and know about the underlying nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the backside is worth as emollients of deep foundation, and as illnesses beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of aeration, so it has mastery of treating well; and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth as ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in place of the .ij. sophists, and of the .ij. cripples, and however they refresh the body after long use, and make paunch come in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first empty, and suck strongly at once, and put it hastily, and remove equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the roughness of the blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take warning in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such a hard skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once strongly, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike .ij. times: the first time to make the passage of the thick blood more subtle.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it must be cauterized a third time; and when we want to draw out a little blood drop by drop, then we suffice with a single application.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want much blood, then we repeat often; and if the wound is deep, then we cauterize deeply, and the termination is that the cure should be perceived suddenly,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is suitable for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have obstinate pores, that you open the veins of oily aperture and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in esteem, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a warm poultice, of iris, or of cress, or of chamomile, or another similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if it is one whose skin is tender and has large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on it.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is suitable to wash after the infusion of rose water, or cold water, or water of morel, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or another similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they raise themselves up with the help of asele, or ague of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large swellings raise themselves up with a lot of wine, or with ague of elder, or with a decoction of anet or chamomile, or with other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and moderate foods, and lean meat from a castle, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and moderate food, and moderate lean meats and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he feels better, if he ought to drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men three drachms of triacle or muscat before the bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot and drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The bleeding cups that are placed without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach and the bowel and the kidneys and the loins, for these members do not suffer from being bled in those places.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not perform it with force lest you attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place ventoses on the belly and on the hip to make the limb smaller;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered emptied by sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in bad diseases of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or hot water in which one has cooked herbs suitable for that.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth in depth, and has or has a small opening at the middle, as if to push an needle through.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be with a gentle touch, soft in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have a small iron rod or a straight iron bar to put a binding bandage around,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for old people, and for the lean ones different from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then apply this cupping device to the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or tallow, and put it in the cupping device at the traverse of the rod which is in the cupping device,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping device so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then apply it to the limb, and be careful that it is on the part we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and removes the cupping device;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the bandage thus beforehand, and reapply it frequently, if you are a master.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping, which is administered in illness of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is no vein or perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of blood, and is placed on the limb so gently;
et c’est li forme:	and that's the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without veins, they are not administered unless in limbs where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the wounds of flesh, as we do with ulcers, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the ulcer is such that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without putrefaction, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and apply an ointment on the tender sweet spot, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cured of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply to the wounds;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and shrink, if it is their place or where one can put a cupping glass, one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the place of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the healthy places are too far after the course of the veins, if it is soiled .i. wrap in a cold water bandage, and put on, until the vein is constricted;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is multiple, then put on a broken glass cupping, or galena, and similar things, until it is constricted;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you apply on the limb many peeled peas, and let them stick to the limb until they adhere to it, then it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this kind, take other swallowtails.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the swallowtails do not want to take, rub the limb with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the saneness issues from it.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they fall, sprinkle a little of aloe and of sweet broth, or of cinder, so they will now heal.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, that they did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is foreign to our land, because I never found any good in it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I didn't know anything, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two preceding chapters;
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to any, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so nothing hinders you completely, just as weakness of body, or infants, or old men.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or the tension is not too tight, or too cold; and avoid cold joints, it's known that cold joints are frosty, and the flesh of oysters and goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat too much fatty meat that fills the veins with blood, so you have no doubt of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government that they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that bring great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as a thick soup cooked in water, and rice, and bread, and pieces of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and most quickly repairs the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well mended or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with big tendons that are reunited and join the limb together, so it enforces as if it were before; and do not touch any part of his work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick soups, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Here is the translation:
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is breaking with a wound, and breaking at all with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner has its engine, and its own instrument proper in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and opens well by default, and sounds when pressed by hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breaking;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small breaking.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not matter that you move to the hand, but put on medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold steady subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which goes into the artery, and are the injured parts disjoined, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come to life, it does not leave any day, as long as the abscess is appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Here is the translation:
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is dislocated from two or three parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or at your hand it's a small limb, or at two or three cords, or at a cord and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are reunited, you reset them by adjusting their positions in their joints as much as you can, and beware that through your work no harm or injury comes to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if you dress beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come through their work on the abscessed and contracted limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at the point, you must scold the patient well so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither while turning nor in another way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so stabilized that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not at the point, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar: if it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wraps.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as thigh and leg: if it is necessary to envelop with a large and strong bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire large member, and hold everything in place equally, so that there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then the inner part is lightly touched, three or four times, according to the member, and hold your hand a little above the entire limb, then go above the break and hold it less, so the break then disengages a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the limb a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another limb, and turn inward again above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the lightly touched limbs either linen or drapery, so that it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something soothing to the abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it so for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold it with these straps, and let it be of the size of a large cane reed, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm branches, and let it be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the strap which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold steady on the staples as you did at the first treatment, then put a thread underneath, just as you did at the first treatment on the bruise.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a gentle texture.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are large, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there should be less than two fingers' width between each staple.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the staples after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put underneath them swabs of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruising, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the cure afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And note that it does not suit to stretch these broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is large, it does not suit to put these dressings on before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs suddenly;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and see here the manner of the ancient plasters to restore bruising, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that holds itself as at the mill's wall, and mix it with a lot of egg whites, and put this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of the plaster restoring bruising to many dispositions, and even for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to restore broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to restore bone fractures and to calm the remaining aposteme. Take root of viper's bugloss, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of vieces, each part; crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with coriander moist water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to restore, stronger than the first, when hard aposteme comes to limb restoration. Take roots of viper's bugloss, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each part; crush, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it with anything other than cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore, dry and somewhat warm things, like mirrors and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to apply is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and small pieces of broken eggshell, or feathers of a bird, and vinegar, and similarly equalize, and the broths, and make an application on the lie.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten it, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter bandage, and a moist sea sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or rose oil poultice, wrapped in a nut, until you are certain of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little of the poultice, and do not strain it too much as before; and subtly continue until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are entirely removed, and you have need of poultice and bandage, then resume it, as you did previously in equal measure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if the limb does not respond to what we have said, do not delay further than three days or four days or five days or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture is evident, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then hold back more than at first, and the swelling of his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the patient's skin is drier than it should be, know that the healing process cannot take place.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Raise the dressing of warm water occasionally, every time you uncover it, and let it be each third day, and wash a little of the wound.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work, then, the healing process is slowed down in the limb, and it hastens what the foolish doctor does, which makes the limb twist badly: it's evil, and if there are painful operations, I don't see anything else but to let it be and to open it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are fractures that are made by percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to the joint which is beneath the bone, just like a hatch or a fissure; and because of this it is called this type of fracture "hatchure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts through the bone from above, striking it senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these .ij. fractures are great or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or a split, or a break in the neck bone, or a fall onto stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or similar things, and makes a piece of bone enter downwards, and it is like the veins when they burst as they strike against the ribs; thus within the ribcage.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have damp or moist bones, like the head of an infant.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it has all these kinds of breaks which small pieces are dislocated if they are thus; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of breaks through the traction on them, and the inquiry by stretching, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similar capillary is known through this, that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs above it, then it shows the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the break, beware of these accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and palpitation, and fever and ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so that it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary to split the affected part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the head of the suffering patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a painful abscess, he is helped by those who need it, and it is necessary that you fill the hole with soft, moistened cloths in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the painful abscess is calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then start to cut around the bone, and it is done in several ways of work: one way is that you cut closely in front, and this is the form;
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you make another incision, a larger one than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it thus, so that you administer small hammer blows with tar, not too deeply so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have a margin or circle above it, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more of them, if each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, if you have administered hammer blows for all tests; and this is the form of the four manners of administering hammer blows:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of hammer blows to pierce around the broken bone is that you place a tar-covered hammer blow on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the hammer blow elsewhere a little later, and do so throughout, then make incisions in the space of the bone which is between the wounds, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, such as forceps; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which is delayed from the bone to all other similar instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more refined and more subtle than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no numbness of scales, if they lightly touch the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is that which Galen said, which is more wise; and he praised it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this incisional instrument, which is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is stuck to the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one does not feel well and feels fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not reach the membrane, and the bone is coated so much by above, and there are small pieces, thus it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to scrape off the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like structures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its adjustment; and this is something that is not readily available to one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soften it with rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and soften it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first dressing; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another layer, and do not bind it further until it holds the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is appeased, then disperse it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and farina of veal, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and administer again medicines without sharpness or biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and beware that the wound is not too clean, so you do not leave it open, nor leave it to assemble in a bulb, for when the bulb assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one places something biting on the wound, it necroses from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take warning then, lest some bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing better comes from the medicine that one has applied, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glueing a dressing, and put it on the swollen place.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal by means of cures that are suitable, until he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the three parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the joint, because they are bones; and that which is beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the injured parties is broken, it is necessary that you apply your small finger or thumb to the birth of the nail, and make equal the fracture according to your natural finger index, and at the pouch by deficiency, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nail, and cannot be reached by the fingers to the joint, it is necessary that you place it equal at the head of a thick rod a little large.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, you remake another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, then you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	Here is the translation:
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply cautery to another part, the break is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that one should soften the tents in burr, and change every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites, and powder of millet; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes apply on or near the eyes of an eagle in place of tents, and if there is a soft drapery inside, and hold the break, and soothe the patient within; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you mix cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a little pouch of diaquilone.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come, then apply an emplaster made from flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind the skin too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the skin is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then remove as much of the extraneous things as possible from that, then sew up the gash, and treat the injuries with charming remedies, and suddenly, just like emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no depth in the skin wound, then treat it with tents, and I put strips of plaster, so that it may be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of pain beforehand, and the break is downward only somewhat, and it is not broken in two, unless a knob forms inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently feel the break inside, and hold it with the other hand from behind, and set it straight.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are displaced, or broken, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and place it on the broken jawbone, and put on a double bandage; and put on the bandage a large, well-made staple, or a piece of leather equally long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, so dislocate it on the third day, and then set back in place what is changing; and put a poultice on, made from the powder of soft wheat with plenty of egg or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and put on a light poultice, and if the poultices are altered, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or wounds come, you should minister to them what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove the null piece of bone that was broken; if you subtly remove the extraneous fragments with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with a flame according to its necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put thereon suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, if one holds the shoulder which feels the strength broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form may be as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have mastery of extending further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold steady the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you make equal the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the forceps to the forefront, because it comes in obliquely, then it is necessary that the patient gaze upwards on their shoulder; and put under the shoulder a little oreiller, and push the ministers' shoulder down, so that the bone of the forceps is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken in pieces, then it is necessary that you bind them together; and draw forth the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot be joined by any excessiveness, then take one of the incision instruments that you have; but put under the forceps this instrument, to protect the affected area.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and shape it like a spoon, and it is not a device, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have .ij. joints, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the routing of the wound that you made when you drew forth the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are unsure of a hot abscess, so touch the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, so fill the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, so soften with a drapnel in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder from soft millet and egg white, and apply light staples, and place a splint underneath, if you have mastery over it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double drapnel on the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle steel strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and apply the star to the breakage, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy flesh, and underneath the ailing flesh; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage firmly, and you clearly see that the star does not move above the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the tendons are relaxed, if you restrain it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient sit on his back, and put a small pillow under the shoulder blade, to lift the joint high; if you adjust the break of the fracture by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it steady and leave it like that until it is restored; and it is restored in 28 days at most, and in less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and you cannot set it right except by touch; if you arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millet with plenty of water, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle strap, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the strap is not aligned with any part of the shoulder, use a strip of linen to adjust it, so that the strap is evenly adjusted; and then tie it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the ligature every day; and all the times it becomes loose, tighten it, and adjust the strap if it is out of place, and comfort the patient on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be certain, for it is not a thing that sets itself right lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone projects forward, and not below the heart, if it is dislocated upwards, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the violent force to appease an acute abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thigh is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and totters, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels it well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to put everything in order as it should be; then put on plasters and stoups of subtle saltwater, or another lighter fustigation, and wrap it in a drapery, and tie it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the rounded dressing around the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour with the bandage, and if it becomes loose, then hold it fast; and if you need to remove it, because of corrosion or purulence that comes from the flesh, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and remove it, and dress the wound, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the dressing, and hold it fast until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It happens that the breaking of the ribs only occurs in the large ones at the back, and at the inner head, and does not bend except for the reason that they are slippery; and one feels it well during the examination of the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restorers are such that you make equal the breaking, as it is necessary. And then put the plaster, and hold it with a strap, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, and puncture, just like a pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane; and it reaches to points, and all and vomits greatly, spewing out blood, and it is a grievous illness, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they should be given windy foods which inflate the stomach, in order to soften the fracture by blowing.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of them said that one should put ventouses on the limb, to suck out the putrid matter, and it seems like a reason; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the surplus fluids from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they instruct to cover the limb of a bruised thigh with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make equal the width within, then let it be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot suffer through the bone which points to the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to split open the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to ward off the blood; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then place on drapelled moilliez in hot roset oil, and put on the limb; and cure while treating the limb of those who need to be treated for an abscess, and let it be sovins under the rib where it is necessary, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will burst; and also it has a vertebra in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel. You know that they are mortally ill in many dispositions, and if they move well and feel good when you hold them steady, you know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so you apply a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take heed that the feet are softened, and if the accidents which are in the hands, and on the back suddenly swell up and eject without will; and when one has ejected without will onto their belly, then suddenly ejects without will. And when it is ejected onto their back and they want to sit down, then cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most light.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you prepare if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of roses or oil of Mayew's egg, so that it is appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone dislocates, it is necessary to cover on the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, to a bandage, then apply the ointment for healing the flesh, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on your pouch, then put the plaster and stick it on, so that you have mastery over it; then restrain it, and if a bone has dislocated, apply there, and remove it, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it is, there is not a little diminishment in the head; and makes a long dole, and declines into parts, and comes to the patient's pain at the limb, and points out, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, so that you are above the fracture; and know what kind of break and shape of it; and if the break is only at the head, set it evenly with that break, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is a long one, or it declines inward, make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, place it on the splint, then put it on a stick of wood or cork, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the splint beneath the ribs, until the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if boils come, do not touch them, until the boils are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those which are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full handful of mossy gravel, in this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the joints in high places, and sit the patient on his seat; then you throw a broken branch on the forest, until it reaches the hollow, and has a curved shape of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downward; then put your mirrors to the broken part evenly with your hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you bind the patient to his stool, and tie his hand to his neck, then instruct the ministers that one should hold what is on the break with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the joints, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the joint underneath the break, and on the break, and each of the ministers extends to their part. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the joint in a gentle way under the seat, and another towards the elbow, underneath the break; and also if the break is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the joint lightly, without labor, so that the break is even on the joint, and on the elbow; then put the break even, as it should be, and hold steady, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if apostemes (abscesses) come, do not hold back until seven days, and put a soft ointment on the affected area with oil of roses, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place a bandage on the break, then assemble the arm at the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a wrapping, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, so nothing bothers it, unless the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width of space between each splint, and let each splint be as big as it passes over the break; then hold steady on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on setting bones, more strongly and less loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the alignment of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heat, let it be tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each seventeen days the bandage, so that it does not become inflamed and come to the proper place, or the nerves do not become numb from the member because it is too constricted. If it is suitable, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	Here is the translation:
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that joins the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and put it in place.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm at the part below his hand, or at the linen, and another ministration at the other above. And then put it in its proper place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no dislodged piece that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And with the breaking of a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And at the beginning of the restoration, apply poultices to apostemes chaus, if necessary; make a dressing from cerote made of oil and rose water and white lead, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and place the dressing subtly, so that the apostemes chaus may be appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put on an emplastrum of powder from the mill with abundant egg white, then put on the staples, and let the staple of the breakage be a little stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have five or six staples or arms in different positions: either the breakage is in one of the bones, or in .ij.; and hold more firmly onto the breakage than other parts, and tighten less as you go further away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligament afterwards for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some evil accidents happen to the limb, as if a pruritus comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb with warm water, so that the pruritus may be appeased; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then recommence the strapping, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take a ward, the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too stiff, so it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it stay there for some days, until the numbness goes away, and then hold steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days. Or in the meantime, then he puts his hands on his neck, and makes his neck even, and guards against movement and degeneration, and sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said before, there have been few fractures, and it does not come but with repeated sprains.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary for the patient to sit crossed, and sit straight in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministres the broken bones, and put them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and put the plaster and the bandages, lest abscesses come, then I put a staple according to the quantity of the humor; and let it be enveloped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken plant; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the staple be of soft thread as big as the plant of the hand, and bind, if it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the fracture, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is overlapped and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the thread between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of the two, it is the pouches, set it even, as it is necessary; and bind with the plant, and see if you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in the other two, as in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them together in a holder, that holds, or put on a staple, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and heal what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken cuix
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and one sees it well when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by tying above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face downwards, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it is when the breakage is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bands is towards the poignail, and the other bands below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bands are above the knee, and then the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equal to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the band, so that apostemes do not come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the remedy is done in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture .i. a doubled bandage in .ij. or .iij., and remove the superfluous material, then twist the leg so the ankles come to the root of the nail, and put .i. a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then place it on the fracture thus, and place a star-shaped device on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to tighten evenly; then begin to bind firmly .iij. turns or .iiij. around the fracture; and as you go further up from the fracture, and less is the constriction; then take .ij. heads of thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and loosen .iij. devices that are above, then return to below at the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and the constriction, so it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so no abscess or inflammation occurs again.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, disassemble it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are grasping, it is necessary to extract, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to break the bone, and make a cut; and the treatment thus, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the thigh broken in such a way that one puts devices thus, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not close with the patient's illness.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the pulse is restored to its strength, either a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the wrinkle of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the wrinkle of the knee there is little breakage, but it often splits. And if it breaks, it's just a crack, or a perforation, and has all kinds of wounds, and feels wounded, and this senses well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts together equally what is round to its two, so that it may be assembled as much as possible; then put on the plaster, and I put a round steel, if you have mastery of it, and hold it as it is necessary, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, such as hot abscesses and other similar things; if one puts to each accident what is necessary for it, so that it may be healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, where one is called by right "non-muscles", and the other is called "fibula"; and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one sees it well; and turn around. Then apply extension, and set it evenly, and lay the bones in order; but however, it is necessary that the breakage be gentle, and there are several pieces, so that the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two linen bandages above and below, and lay them in the middle, so that the leg does not decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good; and nobody should hinder the length of the leg, which is wooden, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly makes a cast on the breakage or wound; and remove each day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if you cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breakage of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and the two poxes, and it does not happen except in several more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that you have broken bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, so put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are lifted, then press them together until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and padding above, and put under the belly of the foot a small tube at two inches from the plain, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the fingers broken, set them right, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that tube I mentioned, and hold it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, set each finger straight with a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the tube under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, just as we have said; and attend to each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female nature is fractured, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline her towards the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with the natural cotton, and put a large amount as much as the sto; then lift the woman, and raise the back little by little, and thus jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for 20 days or so: if the fracture will be restored, and you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a string at the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the string strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will thus return the fracture; then fill with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the finger of man or woman is fractured, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into my book. For the fracture signifies more than one disposition for the right path of restoration: then give it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the twig, when it is broken, take an eye of a goat and put it on the twig; then wrap a dressing around, and leave it 20 days or so, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set right now, so that the healthiness that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you apply a vitriol remedy, and you have no other option, then start to restore the break at that same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses or ulcers come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses or ulcers come, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the skin of the chest, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, at slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not suitable for putting in your hands, then reset with this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror to take 3 or 4, according to what is needed for each cure of fracture; and let it be strong and a little thick, so it does not bend with compression on the limb during your work, and let it be angled beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the bolt once, as long as it holds, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for that, or incision or sewing, according to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone from asperties and minor scars.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then wrap it in a black sticky bandage, and properly so that it is in this state; and do not put anything on the open wound or other things where oil has been applied, lest you cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times they have done foolish things, and have caused death or corrosion on numerous occasions; and may the strappings be more gentle and softer than other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in place of these, rough bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, one or two days later, a swelling around the wound, remove what you had put on everything, and apply gentle ointments to soothe the wounds, just as you would apply tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you elevate the limb many times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone can slide back lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot be reduced but the bone returns again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these disjointed pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death occurs, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come on the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not allow nourishment to reach the member; or from numerous irritations; or from too great movements, not in their time; or because it has little blood in its body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and gladness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the irritation is often from warm water, so that nourishment flows to the member; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone opens, and the form of the limb is ugly, it does not preserve its natural function: if one does not believe that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great evils come from them, and by chance death; however, if the nodes and torture are fresh, then one must be aroused by warm water, or mollifying herbs are applied, as for foilles of vismalve, and roots, and mellilote, and similar things; and one makes a mollifying plaster, as one does it well, and you take the mussilage of vismalve, and mix it with fat of geline or oil of sisament, and make a plaster on it; or you take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that diminish swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And the node is often removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with a moist hand. And so one must diminish movement in the limb at each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuousness is enveloped and hardened, just like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if one wants to cut just up to the bone, subtly cutting at the incision; and to put cushioning and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here is the translation:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if you must now reposition it in a straight line.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if you delay, the swelling will increase, and by chance if it is reset to its place; because it is not advisable to move it at the hour when it is swollen: often spasms and other pains come about.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Always, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the aposteme (abscess) has subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reposition it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes it happens that the jawbones are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jawbone occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and become soft; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its original position more easily.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the minister touches the head of the patient, and puts his fingers like a pouch on one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be firm, to hold steady; and instruct the patient to relax their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are treated with warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are restored evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if you place a moist cloth on their forehead, made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with many threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on their back, and their head is supported between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what they want lightly, and do not struggle to open the mouth to chew and swallow, until the jaw is well-relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural position, then fever and severe discomfort occur, and sometimes a solution of ventosity, and sometimes a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of danger; and many times he whose condition it has happened to will die within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge it from the inner side of the ribs and of the breast, and is often dislocated at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the thigh that is against the hip cannot be dislocated; if it does not, and if it dislocates sometimes, you must reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates to the part of the joint below; and the second is to the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates to the part above, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate within the sinews; and many times they dislocate towards the joint, especially to those who have little flesh, for those who have little flesh, the wound heals quickly; to those who have sufficient flesh, the wound heals at points, and returns to points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men a blow or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and believes it is dislocated by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocations occur when they slide towards the joint, and you make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find on the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath it, place the finger on the head of the shoulder, as if it were a nest; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the finger;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation cannot be forced back, when it is new, or if the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers beneath the hollow, and lift the joint with force upwards to the level; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, placing it beneath; if done quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the medicine should be gently mollifying and soothing, like a decoction of alder and fenugreek and mellilot in water, and so it is soothed.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be placed on their back, and a straight stick of equal length is put under the shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then the mirror is placed at the heel, and the top of the shoulder is lifted gently, and the hand of the patient is treated.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see that it is reset in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make present a home which is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the stick of the patient, and lift the stick high, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers treat the hand of the patient thus below the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long pole in the ground, so that the head should be just like a pestle, neither too large nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then place it under the patient, but let there be soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing upright from the long wooden pole; then his hand should be extended below in another way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a pole of 12 feet in length and 4 fingers in width, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the seat, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Here is the translation:
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, whatever the manner may be, it is necessary that you put under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made of powdered mill dust, with incense and egg whites, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold it firmly under the seat, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then feed him more after 5 or 6 days, and move him; and if it is strengthened and it is not softened, he is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is weakened by moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauteries to three places, as it is described before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 6 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint has never been in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slow movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation from the burn
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is known that the joint of the burn is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not repeated, because one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the burned patient with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way, so that abscesses do not form in the vein, because if they form in the vein, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset from everything, especially when it is behind; thus it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can restore it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count in the interior, above and below, and bend the jointure to its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and presses from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that the minister extends the arm, and the minister holds the arm, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror joins the jointure to its hand, oil it with some oil to soften the jointure, then bend the jointure strongly, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, set a dry plaster with an abundance of egg whites, and hold the forearm firmly, and bend the arm at the collar of the patient, and leave it for some hours, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some hours, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels irritated after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it well and rub it thoroughly, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat woolen compress, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the compress back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do three or four times, until it is healthy; and if you see, set on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady; if it returns to its proper disposition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints however; it must be quickly returned to its place, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess does not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reduction is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers of the hand, and the doctor places them evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick hand with its palm down on a table at extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on a table, and the doctor places their hand under the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then hold the swelling down with compresses, and let it settle thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the nerves are paralyzed, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy than to cauterize in this case, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it go; then take it apart and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no great grudge, then soften the water with warm water, and rub it until it be healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Here is the translation:
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be still for a while, and then set it even that day; and do not touch the joint, as we have said, and loosen the joint, and make it mobile, and reset it in its place; and do this often, until it is straightened.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur with no control, cannot hold them, and often some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shinbone is moved to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gout".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you should rewarm the gout which has come from childhood; if there is no cure or healing of the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak of great words, where there is no real profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes before the worst, no one is healthy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for the ones that properly come to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have a strap beneath them, so they do not slip;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then make a splint for the chief in earth firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a linen bandage around the patient's joints, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and let the minister know how to bind the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the splints;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well fastened, the splint as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is straightened.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not straighten by this treatment, take a table of three long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put the mirrors at his feet on the other side of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it so that the turntable turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix two splints at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and between each splint, above and below, a palm's width of space.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each splint a hole, where the turntable runs, and let the splints be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two splints have one turning splint, on which the string turns, and have in two turntables two small splints of a palm's width, to turn the turntable.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then put the string that is among the axles to the turntable towards the head, and the other string towards the feet at the other turntable, and each of the ministers turns his turntable with all the string, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, set a plaster of soothing ointment with an abundance of egg whites, and then the bandages, and then the stellate of a small tablet of two inches long, which surrounds the lever of the gouty joint and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a string, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stellate that we have mentioned before; and never administer in a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come in the rear of the spine behind the back, and think that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one must not have false presumption: by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Here is the translation:
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocations is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the healthy one, and cannot bend its knee to the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limbs that are deprived of warmth from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one who is near death, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who is ahead, it is that they straighten their leg according to completion; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make them walk, it cannot go forward, and holds back their urine, and inflames the groin, and when they want to pass, it goes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has it behind, are that they cannot stretch their knee, nor bend, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the back beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you recognize the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no effective treatment; and it does not seem that there should be any pretension.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of three manners of dislocation, you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and strongly bind the leg with two hands, or with a lien that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the hip; and another holds the top of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then it is necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the hip joint, then it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the limb which is under the ankle, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the ankle, and towards the stronghold;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the injured hip, and stretch it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the injured person together with a strong soft ligature on the two heels, and on the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it be suspended from the top of a pole, and let it be one arm's length above the ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the top of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the injured person, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at its former shape, then guide the injured person, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch a ligature properly on the injured leg, and on the foot also.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place the cauterizing irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert the cauterizing iron between the hips of the patient in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and has planted drapels of wet cloths around, so that it does not blind the patient, then extends each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal on his hand at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press in this way as we have said in the gibosity, and ease the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror on the edge of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the injured part downwards, nor lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about the couching on the hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it is on his face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be a point when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and he rests two or three days, then dislocate it, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are equal, bind them, as before, and let them be for two days; then dislocate it, and make it comfortable, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joints are dislocated in three ways: namely, forward, backward, and sideways; and they do not dislocate at all from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their thigh, and if it does not straighten at their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against their feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take their knee in your hands, and pull it between your two, then bend the three bones of the knee strongly; and another minister extends their foot, until the joint returns to its place, and the signs are that it straightens well at their thigh, and the leg becomes light.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and set the leg straight at the hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then remove it; and do not trouble the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not in a good position, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the flesh is swollen, and it pulls before the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The pulling back is lighter, and one must extend it lightly with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the entire toe, then you must make the patient sit upright, and tighten it with a bandage, forcefully applied above the knee, on the thigh.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left. Do this several times, then lift it high up, and push the foot well up high.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do it thus many times, as we have said, by bending and drawing back the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strong hold in the earth between their thighs, and wrap them tightly around, so they do not hurt themselves;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then pull the muscles of the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with their hands or with a strap, so that it is placed on the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch out each minister equally, and the straps should be between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient in place when one stretches them;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the mirrors equal to the dislocation in his hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns hastily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a point, set the plaster and stupes on top, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are softened, hold firmly; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and delay going to see the patient for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses break out, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them gently without force, and it is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a plain or flat table, and put your foot on what opens up at these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and it does not open at all, then put under the foot of the patient a table at the .ij. head, then hold it firmly, and let it be for two days, then release it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not overly confident in the cure, be wise in the art and do not take it lightly for a long time, and be merciful and slow, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and you begin with calming hot treatments, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses will come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, then administer calming hot treatments, and cure the wound, as it is necessary, with soothing remedies for dryness;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a dislocation with a fracture, and you find the bones separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Explicitly follow the rule of physics
