O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I will complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is strange to everything altogether, so the knowledge is perished and broken off, and nothing remains of it except for a few descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is alienated the knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I will bring it to life together with the ordering of this treatise according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the forms of fire cauteries and other instruments of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for it, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for that reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who intervenes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms, and conjunctions, and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of vertebrae, and the arrangement and moving and resting muscles, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And so Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and indeed in the art of handcraft.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he make an error and kill people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	in such a way that I have seen many of those who interfere with this science and so abandon their knowledge and sense experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut out the abscess of scrofula or collarbone from a woman and cut the arteries of the collarbone.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Why so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And a certain wise man who treated an arrow wound on an old man's leg, and the arrow was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died inside three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it was not removed he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And a certain wise man who took care of the duke of our land who had his leg broken and with the breaking was wounded;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the wise men, full of ignorance, set the breaking on top of the wound in such a way that it was firmly fixed, and left no room for healing, and left him thus at the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that he not be loosened at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and remained thus so that the leg became entirely gangrened and the toes came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come and untie the leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I untied it so it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the way the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who burst an abscess that had become gangrenous, and then inflamed it by the wickedness of his authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a gangrenous sore, when it is purged of melancholic humor, does not agree that one touches it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	namely, one which has peril in several situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which it is necessary that you keep them for yourself, so that the foolish mouth cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take your arms in order, and begin to treat your patients lightly and firmly, and follow the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let go of the grievous illnesses of bad health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and put away your doubts about what troubles you, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Don't take on yourself a bad disease unless you're called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have written this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations with water, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and about the forms of instruments, and of fixings for cauterizations, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is the chapters that are ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is the chapters ordered as far as the head, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, so that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and detriment of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of help, and of harm, is the longest word and subtlest science and secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about these things many wise men spoke and agreed with them;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I am not satisfied with their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire-cautery helps universally to all constitutions where there is matter, except for two constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	it's to know warm complexion with regard to material, and dry complexion with regard to material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a warm and dry complexion together with material, some people divided and said that the fire cautery is a great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that the fire cautery is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured for a hot disease by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who said the opposite say that the fire cautery makes great help for hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you consider the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be so on some occasions through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not intervene except by one who has experimented with it, and who knows by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and the space of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is among the secrets of cures, and of greater good than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth to another member unless it touches the one that is cauterized, and does no harm to any other member if it is not called upon.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicines come from member to member by applying, and bring grievous disease to the afflicted member;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and it happens that the patient dies.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this by experiment and the length of my service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and therefore I excuse the length of my speech, for it does not please me that I take away from you the secret which is revealed by fire and the quality of work, how it repels the diseases of bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Receive him in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm that befalls is put right by the aid of the cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and likewise, if the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a later time when greater harm may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think thus, dear son, as foolish men do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	and they say so;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is not just a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and excels in value for its hastiness and virtue of its work and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And a possible thing is that the patient's illness comes at times according to their complexion, the place of the illness, and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and there are accumulated in him the excesses through the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauterization is administered to the area where he has an abundance of excesses and moisture, as with hot cautery for pain, and similar things, and that same pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is worth after medicine, but their intention is false, and it is said that cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is good.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that cauteries of golden instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and for its high substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the marks of a cautery do not produce disease, but this is not true for I have tested it and found that it is true in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it becomes cool at once.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	so they are burned to the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use fire cauterization that we have made apparent to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And I have arranged this chapter from the beginning up to here, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is worth for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pains of teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, clarifying the third humour or the fourth, according to what virtues, age, and custom of the patient it can support.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient lie back.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit crossed in your hands, and put his hands on your knees;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	and after that place the tip of your thumb on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and let come to you your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from then afterwards sharpen the cautery which is called "olivary", of which there is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make a downward and outward motion of your hand little by little in turning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift up your hand slightly, and withdraw the instrument if you see the bone a little bit;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After take a little of silk, and put in soft and wet cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After placing a damp cloth on moist skin;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it so until the scab is removed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the wound of anointing, which is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it remains sound.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old men say that when a wound stays open longer, it purges more;
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore one should help it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the others say that one should make a fire cauterization as long as possible, and push it so hard that it reaches as far as the bone is wide, just like the women put in their flax combs so that the humors may flow out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After that, one should heal and bind.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in every way, except for some men who have a way of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by continuous natural fluxions, as we observe in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of a fire cauterization is more safe and gentle for me, and from this I work in such a way that I bring about salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, then the patient should use year's resins and pills which are called "cochie", and for purging of the head, and with oils and emplasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one makes the cauterization that we have previously said, and it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care lest the patient's head be of strong constitution, and let it not be too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then one must cauterize below this type of cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards make a cautery on each horn of the head right up to the bone, just as we have said before, and make another one in the place which is called "vasselz";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the place where one puts poultices;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and lift your hand so that you do not see right up to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head's cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease extends as far as the eye, and the joint is purged by medicines of the world, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and nothing helps;
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then he performs cauterizations by two methods, namely from medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterization of medicine is that you take an almond, strip its skin and grind it into small pieces like two halves, and then make a temple on the spot where the pain holds in such a way that you can place the ground almond under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is placed, if it binds and strengthens well, and leaves it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then unbind and treat the wound with garlic, and leave the sore thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put a poultice of buttered cotton on it until it purges itself.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment with ointment, as long as it remains sound;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that this is not good, then make use of some burning medicines that I have written or any other treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery to which it pertains.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a clove or if there is a little curvature, and has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and sets it on the painful place, and holds one's hand and turns the iron a little bit, until the middle of the spear that is to be burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flow forth abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Then apply a poultice on top of it, and put it on the place for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all along the point, and take care not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of a headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously discussed in divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the preceding cauterization about medicine and fire does not help, then you must heat the cauterizer which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and then place it on the aching spot a line of about half an inch long, and lift your hand once, and make sure you do not cut the artery and that it does not reach just to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jawbone that goes limp when eating, and the nerves have regard only to the limpness and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or even greater fear for one who does not know how to deal with it, and is not experienced or studied;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work to follow its way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how one stays bloodless when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the head also as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterizer having two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has tried medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizing tool called "poins" to the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	Afterward, prick all around the ailing ear, or around both if the pain holds in both, and draw away slightly above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to begin;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and have X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure, let it be until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from scorbut and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this similar thing of torture that moves with phlegm from urine and purgations of head and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one in the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cauterization in the part that appears healthy, and make it cauterize near the top of the ear on the edge of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery go on until the middle of the key is burned away.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is like the appearance of a cutlery that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knives be a little bigger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure, let the wound be as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one at the place called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	From lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	Give to the patient great years and pillowy substances for the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After that, apply to the head of the patient all, and place on the occuput a mustard plaster as written in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the fire-cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it heals thus, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it does not heal, then make three fire-cauterizations inside the head from above down to the neck, and have a space of two days between each cauterization.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see it swelling, and the patient is suffering, then make one cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, make two more on top of the two horns, and treat it until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from chill of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleared of years and what we have said beforehand;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after that, the head of the patient is to be cauterized inside and on each horn, and then again behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the most bitter part is burned, and lift up your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the patient has been cured, and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be, as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a cautery except in the case of those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from prolonged treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot otherwise suffer, then do gargarism and mastication to cleanse the brain often with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's leader is one hundred leagues away, and I make the cautery as we have said before, and I make the cautery on the vassal, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is far and suffering, I make the cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, do one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm accumulates, then do those cauterizations of threads as we said for someone with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king's leader of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after I make a linen wrapping well done, like a circle, and put it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and let the patient be crossed, and be well held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after present the lining, and make moves with old sheep's tallow butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and let the heat be tempered by fire, so that the back can bear it when poured on.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After clearing the circle from inside towards the head, and letting it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once a week with another good governance, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize, make many points all over the iron.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterization moistens the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on a wet cotton cloth in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the disease of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the disease comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and guard against all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After this, command him to put his head back and make a cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending flow of the humor is together in both eyes, or in one if the descending flow is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut off all the veins and arteries that are below the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of bleeding of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the flow with all your might.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you how to extract arteries and perform cautious incisions.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one makes a cauterization or cautery under the two bones that are behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins or near the arteries that appear at the top of the forehead.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is cold and humid excess, then make the cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of this procedure going down to the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply a cauterization on the forehead, and two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations or cauteries under the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is necessary to do more, then apply a small cauterization on top of each little cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer the medicine according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three bitter hellebores to drink.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king's beard, and make a fire cauterization on the spot of the olive-cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizations on the "clavilis" which is called above the two earlocks, a little below the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery so you don't cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this iron called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	To which it pertains:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, make two cauterizations on the two earlocks as long as the earlocks are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and don't remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyebrow is converted to a beard, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to know by fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are equal and have grown, then put the patient in a good state;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	afterward mark on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign below the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put damp cotton in egg white and powdered periwinkle on the eye, then heat the cauterize as is its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked point by point several times, so that the edges be burned away.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the sign of the health of the operation is that you see the paper contracted, and the hairs lifted to the level of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Lift your hand then, and let it be so for three days, then put a moistened cotton cloth in the poultice until the scab is removed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment as long as they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come and the paper is softened then start the cauterizing again on that very spot just as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place and is even, and does not prick the hair at all.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and live chalk, each one a third, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	et the way haste, so that it does not cool, then put on top of the form as you are made like the leaf of the myrtle tree, and place on top of paper eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness remains only in one oil alone, then it must be worked on that one, and also in both;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place a moistened cotton cloth under the oil;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the patient's joints are in your hand and place your thumb showing above the medicine, and press it gently every time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for he feels stinging also as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done all this, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the stinging is gone, then lift the cloth away, and put it back as you see the paper lifted up just like if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by cutting;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	But not so, then one should still apply more medicine to the wound or where the medicine has no effect, until all your works are equal and your eyes are in order.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a damp cotton poultice in butter as long as the burned area is covered, after curing the wound of ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to beware well of your work with great caution lest there be no harm done to the patients.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hair pricks in the oil, then restart the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after it has been cured until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and that is the shape of the fern of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to how they are constricted;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and the right way is not shown to him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	I think I've reached the end of the text! The last line is simply "de la cure de fistule par cautere", which translates to "of the treatment of fistula by cauterization". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterize according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the surgeon's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or change its position;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then put damp cotton in egg white or in pear juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after that, warm the fire cauterizing instrument which is thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and shape it to fit the head like a feather from a vulture, along with the fire cauterizing instrument;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but still, this one that is shaped is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula is opened, and pulling out the pus, and drying.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then work on it, and pull out the bowel;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after apply hot fire to it strongly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the nose near the eye, so that your hands do not act foolishly;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the eye and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, then it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then start the cautery again once more, or if you need to, and let it be for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after I put a moist cloth on butter and let the treatment of drying ointment continue until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king will follow according to what he will come into his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of fire cautery for a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	You understand a fistula, and close the opening;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after that, put in the slit a subtle camel's hair of which it is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it to the quantity of an inch of linen;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and do not let the patient move until the linen piece is applied to its place;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient's wound a moistened cloth, either in the shape of eggs or in an awn;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the linen piece so closes the opening of the fistula, and the wound by marvelous sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the neck, and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the neck.
des crevaices en levres	I think I've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "des crevaices en levres", which translates to "about cracks in lips". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there occur cracks in lips that are called "hairs", and likewise in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	and set it in those crevices as quickly as possible until it becomes a poultice;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after that, cure the wound with cerate until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "de l'aposteme de la goule", which translates to "about the abscess of the throat". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the jaw or in the uvula or the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after having made a purulent discharge and rot and has been envenomed and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you make the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the hole or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron comes to the bottom of it, and in its rear.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	due to movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and this does not help, then place the patient's head on your shoulder;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after apply the fire cautery whose form will come hereafter in such a manner that you put a cord on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put hot hastenings into the cautery and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lift up your hand and begin again the cautery according to your pleasure;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them keep it for an hour and rich fever.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums made soft restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When the toothache comes from cold or warmth, whether it is hot or cold, and medical remedies do not help, then there is need for a fire cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and butter cauterization and fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cauterization is such that you take butter from a cow, and shape it into an iron or earthenware spoon.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent needle, and soak it in melted butter, and apply it to the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And thus do this often until the virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the buttery wool and cotton are cold, then apply it to the aching tooth, and apply hot iron so that the fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauterization together is such that you take an iron or earthenware cauldron, and it should be large enough so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After the burning of the cautery, from which the form will come after this, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the application of this cautery, and then wash it away.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery on whatever part of the head you want, and according to what you can.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the chain:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn the cautery with hair from which this form comes, and have two openings for the fumes to issue at the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it comes to the edge of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply a wet cotton cloth wrapped in butter until the burning sensation is removed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after that, treat the joint with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moors prevail on the pores of the person, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be cleansed first with soluble medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	then apply a cautery to the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn with fierce heat but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After this, perform another cautery at the neck of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" which we have described previously;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and every illness of the pomegranate are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forehead in the veins.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make a cautery in piercing all the cautery that is called "point" of which the form is described before in the illness of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be just up to thirty, or around that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the limb according to what is said beforehand, and make the cauterization of three rinses according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this are the cauterizers lighter, because you do three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then have the patient lie down on their back and on their side.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the cure that is inside the little thing with your left hand on the patient's back.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the fire cauterization which has two needle prongs in this shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the cure until it pierces just to the side, and then come the figure of the cauterization together with four cauterizations.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and therefore it is made cauterization with the cauterizer that has three prongs, because the figure of cauterization is six cauterizations.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and that is the shape of the cauterizer with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is added to this one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After putting on the cautery, burn powder with silk.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after making the patient rest and not moving the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little things happen then, and make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterizing nail, or many cauterizations in piercing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is refastened, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach, as long as they expel it to his complexion, and many cathartics are multiplied in him, and customary cure methods do not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then make three cauterizations below the navel of the belly to the quantity of an egg, with all the cautery clavicle, and two cauterizations outside on both sides until the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they will give birth.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and be the cauterizations so deep that they reach the two parts of the kidney, and be the shape of the cauterizations according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a great cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and that person who has fear of this cauterization, cauterize in piercing and sign above the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see in advance.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When pain comes to the liver from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is greatly removed from its natural constitution by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be strengthened on his habit;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and mark three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the ribs of a man come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and leave a space between each cautery the thickness of an egg;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long in the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only half of the key, and let the patient be upright on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then sit up, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and that is the shape;
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, then cauterize with the cattery, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the way through the skin, for you would cause the whole body to dry out;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it come just to boiling, for the skin is very subtle thereabouts, and you know well how it should be.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane;
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels pain that is not too strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, then he feels unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then when this treatment was being done by the midwives, it is necessary that the patient be covered on his head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, because that is its shape.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the keys are burned, and come just to the spleen, until the purpuration is all cured.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure according to the treatment of sores until he is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not necessary that anyone but he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and through whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly undertake it; and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cauterization for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancient ones say that one should make purulent cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristology long, the largest you can find, and it should be dry, and also as big and as long as you need;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and soak it in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the forceps and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower down in the part that is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cauterization in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the breast after the cauterization that is between the two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but rather hold it openly just as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And it is said by some ancient that someone should use fire cauterization to make the abscess resemble a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and let go of the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said with divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which one method is that you make three cauterizations, or four, depending on the length of the mole, according to the figure of the liver cauterization that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be mindful of his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cauterization is that you scrape the cauterization which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the cure which is near the mole, or the patient's cut comes towards the left side, and be the elevations of which you lift the cure according to the cure, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After putting the two nerves inflamed until the kidneys are perceived from the other side, and then proceed with the fire cauterization, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when he has gotten full recovery for long time, and this is more than the others of the treatments before said.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire cautery does not succeed with an hydropic, except by the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the bladder, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterizations be well near the spine of the kidney.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterization open to get rid of bad humors for a long time, and not abandoning the patient's cure after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the fire cauterization for the belly is the key that we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and this one for the back is olive-like, according to what it has been placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the wrist bone and the pinky finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn around.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in depth, thus the fire would come to a halt, and let the cauter be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Then do two cauterizations on each leg, at the tip of the wrist bone.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and the long cauterizers, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, on the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizers there for a long time until the water inside flows out.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the healing of other wounds that we have said.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a flux of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the vital and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of treatments.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cautery, by means of circulation.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four small cauterizations around the mouth, subtle as each one is a small nail, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the navel, and one on each vertebra, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and are composed of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and they are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit, so make cauterizations.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On top of the spine on the back, that which is entirely below the almond-shaped protrusion and gradually decreasing in a triangular shape, and one fire cautery below the lip two fingers' width.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees his face swelling, then on the face one does a great fire cautery on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for all the cautery to be done.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment let the limb remain until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnosity which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the ulcer, if the cautery appears to be razor-sharp, then put it all afire on the cut ulcer.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, because the blood will flow.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of ointments benefiting as long as they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a great fire on the aloes, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an uncured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes and is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe the entire tent-like opening and take note of how deep it goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After the fire that seems rough has cooled, and you apply it to the abscess according to the amount that the liquid has entered, and restart the fire until those corrupted parts are burned, once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount of need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the abscess goes to the bladder and into the intestine, be careful of those parts, and do not apply fire except on a well-greased area, and think that it is not perilous.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after curing the area until it is healed, and if the area is swollen, and the matters are removed over a long time, then know that the area is entirely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matters are not removed, know that the bone is twisted, and the bones at the fontanelle are corrupted.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as one of those we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	From the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When the pain of cold comes to the joints, and from great humidity, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on the joints from one side and the other, at the clavicle cauterization that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will make greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then he makes a cauterization on the part in front of the bladder, where the hair of the pubic region begins, and there is one to the right and one to the left, and each cauterization should be as long as the nose of a pea.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and do the fire cautery behind the back, or two if you need them;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and make the cauterize nails according to the form described before.
de la marris	Of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the menses are cold and moist, and do not cease to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, it causes great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to do three cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said for the caustic of the bladder, and two behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and make the cauterize nails, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the thick discharges descend to the back of the haunch, and because of this, it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the hip is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	et is found the lead of the department view, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the thigh near the armpit with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign in front of the lead around the thigh as it turns, so that the thigh is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present, make three large ones on the olive-shaped part, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the bells.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the thigh near the armpit, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick, foul-smelling pills or other similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After this, do a fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	it means together burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the back of the heel three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery a space as wide as a thumb, and be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	one never makes a cautery in the middle of the back of the head, therefore there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, then you should cauterize at the circle cautery that we have said before in the dislocation of the back.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it so that the circles contain all the haunch, and all the spokes of the wheel are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain remains in the haunch and does not reach as far as the hip or as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes just to the hip and leg, make two cauterizations there where the patient says that the pain holds them, and one cauterization above the ankle four times, on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauterization be cutaneous, and let the spokes of the wheel be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two inches of the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more to it.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if it is that the pain is below the knee towards the hip, then make a cauterization at the cutaneous or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations so as not to leave the cautery too long until you burn the nerves and great arteries, and do not cause more great annoyance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left them so that the leg was all inflamed, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted through all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the stomach from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a fire cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say in the cauterization of the groin, that is how it is done, make such a fire and let it be at the head as big as a walnut or a little less, and let it be between two fingers and let it be from one finger to another the distance of an egg's width.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the fingers be separated by two parts, and let them also be like hazelnuts, and it should have one good piece of iron well made.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the boil of the patient's groin, and let it be turned above the right side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let it cauterize once only after the first cauterization, and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Allbuchasium says that we should use little of this fire cauterization for fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet those are good cauterizations that can be endured by him where it afflicts.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning cauterizations of medicine are those that you make an instrument to fit between the edges of the door, and it should be made of iron or earth for one part to be long, and in the height have two noses, and between each have the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be open on both sides, and come together together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After put the poultice of the haunch on the lying patient's sound side, and then place your hand most above the poultice of the haunch.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After gathering between the two circles of hot water that is heated over the fire pot, and let it be an hour's time, and suffer the patient to endure the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it also finds a stinging like fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the stinging is passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the cloth of soft water, and let it be thus three days, and put on butter until that which is black from scorching is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it three days so that purging may ensue;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that holds water according to what you did in the same way.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot water, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small hole through which the tip of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place it in another pot well weighted, and place sulfuric alkali and hot water above, so that there will be two layers of powder on top; then you will have it well prepared for your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it remain thus until the hot water and sediment or weighted pot descend; then take all that water, and pour it on the heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very hot and prepared for administering in medical operations and other cauteries.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it works as well as fire, and if there are other medicines that one cures well by cauterizing the skin thus with testicle and myrrh and cardamom with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his hainche and sciatic vein, and he highly praised it, and said that no other cure was made, and he became well only once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself just as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And instruct in this manner that you take green tartrate of fresh and dry earth, and crush it well with a little piece of grease, and apply it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel any more burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath until his body is somewhat warmed up, and then make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away altogether and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cauterization on such medications unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair fires, it helps a lot.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and one must make the cauterization in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the other one which is called the fleshy part.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Then take dry goat's hair, and set it on fire until it is coals, and apply it to the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again in this way, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cauterizing is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or striking or excessive evacuation or similar signs of cold matter spreading, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary afterwards that the patient be rid of fetid pills or others similar ones, that one makes them on their back, where the pain holds, three lines marked out in wax, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and it should be done with the cauterization called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the middle of the cauterizing nail according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow, strained look when they wake up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last vertebra of the back and on it the appearance that comes over other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cured, then cauterize it with the "celcle" cauterization according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery may penetrate each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a fire cautery that pricks 2 lines or 3, and have the points close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in a place of giltosity which is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is due to moistors that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the heat of the cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-like according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery all over the cautery which one calls "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make a cauterization on each knee three times or four from each part, with all the cauterization olive-like;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand back longer than until the sparks of the iron are burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain at all, then make a puncture on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if pains come as far as the shoulders or as far as the armpits, then cauterize each part, and make good management of the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the gallstone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When ulcers come in inguinal areas, and the bowels descend to the groin and it's newly so, then it is necessary that when you see them being cured, do not interrupt him that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and make him do things that loosen the belly, so that the flux descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his loin cloth until the bowels are restored, and then lift it up to your shoulders, and mark an incision below the ulcer on the bone of the elbow, and all around a sign like the half of a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the fire cautery to its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is white and gives senseless statements.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the attendants hold their hands above so they do not return backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well on the patient's hips, and place under them a cushion and a servant above the hips, and another one above the breast who holds their hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the fire cautery on the sign at the tip of your finger, and hold it steady and straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so continue again another time until you have reached the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful subtly lest the bowels should burst when you do the fire cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	lest you burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this the patient does not die or suffer another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that children's cauterizers are subtle according to their size, and for large people also large according to theirs.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days of treatment, remove the scab from the cauterized area until the inflammation is gone.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After treating other ulcers until they are healed, and have the patient lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his nails be left long, so that the bellows do not ring out when he is about to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a bandage well made brought to him, and let it be worn for another 40 days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and have good rest, that he not overwork himself and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and too loud shouting.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he does this teaching then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say afterwards the treatment of cutting in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the running of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then the fire cautery is done according to its quantity, and it is burned a third part of the way down.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized at the fire to three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the edge of the incision and make a line above the ulcer's width, and another below it, and then insert your hand into the entire cautery channel.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and more tedious.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, and virtue, and its location in terms of torments and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed from the first cautery, it is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	and if he does not, start another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that one should change to the member that is nearest, so it is necessary that you do cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of menstruation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The members are aided sometimes by a cauterization with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you not see it being cauterized, take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not descend nor leave anything behind, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then make five cauterizations on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I move the head forward, and the other [joint] toward the forehead to the end of the hairs.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two above the two horns, and one behind above the haughty person;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand be so still that the cautery comes just to the bone, and stays until the scabs fall off, so that the vapors of the great humors can come out;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the swelling is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is manifestly inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize with the fires of these cauteries which we have said above, and one in the head, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one great one on the scapula and another below, and two on the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II on the sides, and II on the tendons of the back, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of nerves that are on the backside calcanium, lest you burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes make a fire cauterization on the bone of the fingernail, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when I make more cauterizations, it helps the patient more, and brings greater profit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already quite corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterward, wash with flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then one makes cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be slightly inserted into the flesh of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply ointments as long as they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And at times one does a cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and no one should intervene in this case unless they are familiar with the members and the exit points of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" has taken hold, and the medical art is of no use, then cauterize with a cautery a little bit deep, according to the thickness of the flesh of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then apply a poultice of flour and vegetables with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and the blood of colander and almond, each one in its part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let them all be together, and be tied with a bandage, and be at rest at the same place until they are healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chance by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the border of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And yet the sages say that one makes a fire cauterization in the middle of the sore;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen at times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more right thing is that he be cauterized around, at the cauterization which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it causes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see hastening to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then one cauterizes around with many small cauterizations in pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after that, let it be so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with what is called "the form":
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the midst of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the kernel, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this way that the course of the purgation may be guided.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterward, care for him until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away members just as fire dries out dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can suffer a burn together with fire, then file the cauterizers small and great, according to what is needed at the place or where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after that, cauterize all around until you have removed all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, except for what is corrupted to be cut out.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas a poultice with oil until the fire's burn marks are removed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the healing of ointments brings forth flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days healthy flesh does not form, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then recauterize on what remains of the corrupt places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this remedy is sometimes cured by medical treatment in place of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but all the same fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of hot remedy in the section:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on the feet due to a defect there arises a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big swelling that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery of this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and water-hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is when you forge a cautery like a awl of beechwood, and it should be made from good iron to the measure that it can pierce through all parts, and have subtle edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	then place everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it thus for three days until it begins to putrefy.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of wild mulberries crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out by its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with oil anointing it until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by a defect of the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, so you should bring cauterization with hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a piece of bone or iron, or a quill from a plover, and place it on the nail and the almond, that is to say, small white patches;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the bone so that it surrounds everything, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand going around so that the edge of the bone comes to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water way deep down to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it so, and it will peel off completely to its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Soften one after another, until you have extracted all those inside the body, then treat the sores that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure of the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold or hernia or quartan fever or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization on the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive-shaped cauterization;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	so let it tremble, and hasten will be the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes apparent on the surface of the bathed body or foul pus comes from great corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a cauterization on each head of the pustule;
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	one subtle cauterization with birch bark or by which the point is seized by fire, or with a long Aristolochia root, or with the lentil-shaped cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And at the beginning, one cauterizes them according to this manner, and they cannot grow forward anymore, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there occur great hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the forefront, or at the incision of an abscess, or at a member's cautery, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the blood is pacified below your fingers, and no more drops.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then set the cauterizers of olive oil on fire, small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cauterizer on that vein where you are holding your fingers, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to perform these one after another until the blood is exhausted.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when blood flows out of the artery, one cannot well repress it even if the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extracting it when it is not yet treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stop blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be tied and held tightly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever thinks to stanch blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, will not profit unless the cauterization is not good.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, then one should put their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but moisten with cold water frequently until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries ahead of those that have need of cauterizations and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical cures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all disease where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with hot medicine, and the methods, reasons, and forms of cauterizations.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter at the beginning of the book, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way for those who find it more readily what they desire.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this, dear friend, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come into cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	those who are so tormented by their disease that they would die quickly because of the suffering they find in their illness and the greatness of their malady.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one should be afraid of these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And from these ones who give you sense and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and can take and gain.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prediction and indication in the treatments of your sick to whom salvation may be converted;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to be filled with the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauterizations, which I have divided from the beginning up to here, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the full head with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease comes often to children during childbirth, and when the midwife constrains the child's head too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause because one doesn't know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I never saw this disease outside of children, and all those that I have seen died suddenly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me that I should stop working on such cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw an infant whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be borne.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it killed him, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the spine, between the skull and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the works are such that if moisture is between the bone and the muscle, and abscesses are small, you should cut a wide incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should also be as long as two of us, as long as the moisture runs.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see to the shape of the spatula-like thing:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that each part of the head's commissure is open, and the water jumps forth greatly when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	so you should cut three incisions into the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after incising, extract all moisture away.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After binding the incisions with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it like that until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then loosen it, and treat the wound with tenting and ointments, and let the head be strained to the same extent, and then let the patient eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incising is to look at where the swelling of the abscess lies, and the gathering of water.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is before;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the filling of water, and make it according to what you can do.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful that you don't cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let flow a vein of blood, so that the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of the joint
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is fire cauterization, by cutting off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is then necessary, when you see them cut, that the patient put their head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after the wound is rubbed with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck all the way down to the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein lies, and the ears of one side and the other are after the ears, and they are not responded.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the ears with a stain, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument of two parts, so long as the vein comes up to the bone, and let it be by the length of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting just like two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the sense, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark with a stain and make up to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and as much blood as is necessary to put forth if it is six cubits, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone's point of the syphac, then cut what abscesses do not come there, and then strain the wound and tie, and the ointment treatment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migration comes, and acute catarre, due to excessive moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old-fashioned foreskin and similar things, and all medical treatments by various methods of medicine do not help him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have counted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	The manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hairs on his temples recede, and pays attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is more readily responded to than in some men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is responded to, then the patient tightens his neck with some cloths, and then rubs the joint with a rough cloth, and raises the joint in warm water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pinch it high up and carefully separate it from the layers that are below each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, then turn it at the tip of the needle, and cut from that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Since she is not cut, the blood does not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And drain the blood of six cups, up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it in two loops with a strong double thread of silk, so that no clot forms before the wound closes, and blood flows freely.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then remove the excess that is between the two loops at the same time, and then, if you see fit, use a cutellated cautery to cauterize the area up to the bone until the ligaments are cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and that is the main work if the patient has no fever and is of warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization helps to end moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, when extracting arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put a well-made tent over it.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are freed, one should take care of dry medicines that produce flesh and tents, until he is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if there is no blockage of the artery as long as you work on it, then hasten to cover with a cauterized cloth, or apply vitriol to the place and strain it in your hand so that the blood is stopped.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you don't have that present, then put a poultice on the place as long as the blood is frozen, and apply cold water to the place until the bleeding ceases, and strain it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and what is more effective and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizing blade cutting into two parts, but the blades should be well spaced to withstand their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cuts are too dense, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should be that between the two knives there is a space of about an inch, and then when you have signaled to close the two levers, and then apply the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not solidified by this fire cautery from end to end;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead of the head and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done, and you see the patient's face turning red, and feeling a numbness on the forehead as if in terror;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and when they are warm and moist so that the hairs of papyrus are fallen, and the papyrus is scalded and burned by the heat of tears, it has need of this remedy.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contused cure", and is that you do to the patient who has this disease, making three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and be one of the incisions also like two do inside the forehead going down to the nose and the others two by the sides above the papers and take care of not cutting into the arteries that are on both sides above the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones and be each wound the quantity of three fingers across the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and wet it with cloths to absorb the blood, then thrust the spatula in two parts as this is its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is above the temple down to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape out all the kernel which is between the two incisions to the very surface of the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision down to the other second one, and then draw this spatula out.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	and insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And set the cuticle cutting towards the fatty part at the heart, and the cuticle soft towards the bone, and pull it so that it comes to the middle opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where the bone appears, and then do the same on the middle opening up to the other opening.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the place for the taken blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put a cloth of old cotton in each opening, and place moist cloths soaked in wine, oil, and ale on top, and make sure that pustules do not form there;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, release the bandage, and immediately administer a great amount of cold water, then apply the balm of basilicum with rose oil, and other remedies used for wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone comes with a great catarrh as usual, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening sight, and burned paper;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and in the forehead there is intense pain, and the patient groans;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you know through these accidents that those materials and the cautery do not come forth from many voices, and the mother takes care of what is there, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great gash in the forehead, and another of moderate width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin at the left side of the forehead to the right, and let the incision be just up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and remove your hand from the temples that move when eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, then wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then cover between the two lips of the wound and put old linen cloth, and try linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is opened, then you should rub the bone until flesh begins to form, then treat with things that bring forth flesh.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of barley flower, and four parts of safflower, and make an ointment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds so that the flesh may heal throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that drips from the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or stones, or iron splinter, or similar thing like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as jasmine, vetches, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it settles in the ear or another way that does not belong to the ear and does not grow there, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if it yields any drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then apply an extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make it sweat with condiments, and stop the nostrils when the sweating comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and it extends above the ear.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times harm comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, then administer extraction with fine tweezers, of which there is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps forth at the tweezers, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then administer extraction with a fine thread of small doubling;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not jump at that, then make a leaden chain and insert the end of the chain or ear plug into the hole in the ear very strongly, and stop what is around the chain with soft wax so that blood cannot enter with the chain;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then pull it forth firmly, for many times harm comes as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come forth in this manner, then take fat of which takes the birds, and put in some instrument that is sharp to do so, and wrap a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and draw forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if she does not jump away from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear before the abscess appears and spasms.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of cutting is that you first let the patient's cephalic vein bleed and extract the blood according to its power, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty part or dependent part.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the incision like a moon, as long as you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's pus that forms and swells, then administer an extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if he cannot get out, administer a spatula-like instrument held subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and bring an incision of that kind.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the ear moisture, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then strain it through subtle pincers and a press, just as we said, so that the extractions are light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water then that runs into the ear, it is fitting for the patient to use an external poultice first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be bound on that very ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps away because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take many pieces according to the length of your should be held tight and light, and heat them a little in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put the patient's ear orifice in your own hand, and lift up from below with his fingers on the other side, and strike with another instrument on top of the bone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop striking one piece against another until all the water flows out, and thus it jumps all out;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, then take the stick, and put one end in the ear, and the other end is pressed with fire until the stick is well burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then redo the other side of the sticks as long as all the water has dripped out, just as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small, such as a rabbit and similar things, treat it just as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large enough to be felt, then make an incision with forceps.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and that is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of moles from the ears, when you have treated it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there is no opening anywhere, then treat them with delicate tweezers, and if not, take the cord that has the form here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then pull strongly on the cord.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then wrap around the cord with cotton as I said in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not emerge as we said, then administer distillations as the ancient ones have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find or treat about distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, according to the form that is here, as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or of lead, large below at the small holes, and above for distilling.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation by the lead instrument well-made for this, and if you see take the file and envelop it around the point advantageously with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour in your oil or juice, and as much of your medicine as you see fit in the cane, and the cane be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then insert into the file all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or flows from the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation be heated by fire so that it can be distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any hole in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men through the bursting of a wound or the growth of a tumor within the ear, and these burstings sometimes go very deep into the ear so that it cannot be seen;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes the hole bursts forth again, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which goes very deep and cannot be seen is a serious wound in many dispositions, and what can be seen requires that you place the ear of the patient in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opacity appearing, then the work is all in this space where it takes its shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be gently and carefully placed before and behind all smooth, so that it does not hurt the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	The skin of the opening is of bone or flesh of the ear, so hold it with subtle pinchers and cut it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstructions are deep in the ear, then take a subtle razor and heat it slightly with fire, then put it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you sense the opening that makes the patient feel sorrow to hear, pierce lightly, and beware that you do not wound the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian myrrh.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with pink water, and powder it with vitriol bronze.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then care for him until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the discharges of blood come forth, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the discharge of blood which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of paperwax
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This other thing that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you must stretch it with forceps and pincers, and cut off a spatula's width of its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then place it on a leaden plate.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not crack, then cauterize with the lenticular fire caustic, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth nothing.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times repair, so that nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	Of the Hellebore
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come from the eyes things that seem like hoarfrost in their shape and hardness, and because of this is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take heed that the rain falls from one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the incision wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing a little bit of parchment, it will cause no harm to the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, then sew it together with a suture, and care for it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, then do not apply pressure, because the swelling will restore itself soon and will form flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the rain is running down inside the ear towards the top, then reverse the parchment, and take with tweezers, cut and press from one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it hurts nothing;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the poultice is applied, then wash the eye with salt water and care for the place where the wound will form until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that is applied to the papers above, and this happens more in children than in no one, and it hurts very much to their eyes, and they come with catharrs in the mornings, and are unable to gaze at the sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they lie down on their faces quickly, and sleep above, and have their papers below their eyelids dampened by the swelling and appearance that has covered the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the lid to your eyes and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on a stone;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the parts be assembled within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula's edge, cutting a notch of moderate width, and it should not be any larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin smooth until you come to the part that contains;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in various positions comes forth from the notch, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then extract it thus as one piece of cloth wrapped between your hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and beware that you do not insert into the incision, so you do not come up to all the spatula just to the eye, so you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exit wound does not open in the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision a little so it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten the cloths with ale and water, and put them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who burn it and put it on top in order to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the aposteme comes hot to the skin, then apply emplasters soothing it until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When paper hairs grow that are not natural, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring on mannerisms of diseases such as tears accustomed and softening of the papers and white spots, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and there is the cure according to four manners:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cautery together, or by medication according to what is before this chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canines, according as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary to put the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If she is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then put an needle on all the thread above.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be on the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow at those hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the adjacent hairs, all along the scapular region, from the great wound to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull out the thread, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then draw on the paper an image of a hedgehog, like the shape of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see to unfold the paper which is divided in all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if someone has need, they should take a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make a small spatula on both sides of the two lines that you have marked, and begin to smooth out the great lump just a little.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the thread in one of the two corners of the leather, then scrape all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then assemble the two lips with a stitch of an needle and all the thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make sure to remove any excess threads on both sides of the stitches for any sticky things, if you see that.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, don't bother with it, then leave the stitch and threads for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound without sewing or constraining things, for the paper comes to life at the suturing of the wound and its assembly, but sewing is deadly (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sew the paper in a shape which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, in three separate sections, according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, take a needle with one thread and push it into the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and push the other thread through the large border, and the second thread through the small one, and tie them together between your two threads equally.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above which you have sewn, as we have counted, then tie the two lips of the wound with sewing, and care for it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to the incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar calming ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hair of the parchment is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	so you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of the sinews is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you should transform the parchment and the hole within according to what I have said, then make two sinews by art, and two subtle ligaments as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie the two knots of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the parchment of oil, and strain the two sinews of the two parts together;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it remain thus for some days, and the skin that was stretched will die and wither and harden, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if it is bound by some strength, then let the wound be treated until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is closed, and if the skin has been lifted up, and they can no longer be pricked by hairs.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the works are such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and subtle silk.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then tie the knots together and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order another fine thread of silk briefly, and knot the ends of the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be done in the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and small work; then insert the needle into the root of the hair joined together, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you move it above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull out the hair up to the needle, and insert into the needle that hair, if there is one, two, three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then pull out your hand until the hairs come forth all along the needle in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the needle is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the needle from below all the thread that you have arranged, until the needle comes forth from the orifice above and you see it by the sight of the eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then if you draw the bowstring and thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hairs grow back in their place and the skin heals above.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from the nearest goat's natural growth, and be joined with it or leave it, until they grow out and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the dimness of the eye.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or the purtification comes into the eye, there are two ways.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural and one unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of treatment is that you cut open this swelling, and separate the lips of it, and put inside linen cloths, and tie it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	If you do this, then the illness will return worse than the first one.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but the work of soft things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose of water or high and flaxseed be cooked, and the anointing with dissolved aquilion in some oil, and wrapped in a tent, and the treatment for these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your treatment is that you give yourself guard so it does not harden at all according to its former form;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are far from the remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh that comes to the eye.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that truly is called "axacrati" below which is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and gashes and cauterizations and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the method of treatment is that you take a needle with a doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left armpit to the right, so that the thread comes out through two joints of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then is the flesh above to all the needle, and the cut to the spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should be, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take the razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits or one on each side within the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and be the edges of the two slits at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were the letter "I Greek";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then take that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges being worn away below, from what precedes the paper, then add the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform the treatment for what we have said regarding softening medicines and tents until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a break or a cut or a cauterization, then you must make a clean incision below the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is written before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possible skill as to how they make the figure return to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	from the sudden movement of the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this stitching occurs in the same way as the paper above is sewn with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural activities, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and the stretching should be done by pinching, until you obtain what is subtle in the spatula-like, which is neither too aggressive nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear if the spatula is too aggressive and damages the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and your incision, which you make on the assembled part, should be done lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all that is assembled should be healed, and make no impression on the salty water of the eye, nor raise up sweet water and gall.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put a cloth of linen between the paper and the eye, and place moist wool on the eye in abundance of egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days' use of gall and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the ulcers of the eye.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the finger is in two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	She is nervous and similar to a hard boil, and another one that is not at all nervous, but is similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron and heated in pincers cannot be overcome.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both kinds of appearance begin towards the great tear duct, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head on your shoulder, then you open the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lifts up the paper to your hand, then cools it with pincers of small doubling, and stretches it above.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert a hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the swelling, and push all the way through with the whole needle, and tie the swelling with a thread and stretch it above, and scrape off the rest on the side of the swelling that faces the tear duct and the silk to the hair just up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct by all the fine and subtle forces, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct as usual, so that through the incision the body will not produce tears habitually.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the finger nails grow to the cuticle alone, and onto the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then one scrapes off all the softened scab from which this shape comes:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be sure that the scab does not touch the fleshy part and break it, and that the blister is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour a little bit of safflower oil into the wound, and make a poultice with litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him according to what is needed until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the finger is not numb, and you cannot push the needle in, and the cuticles cannot enter, this kind of fingernail condition is often cured by medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grow as I have told in the section, and if you see it cover, then anoint the patient's oil and take a light scab with a gentle poultice according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently pull the eye upward; and if you see that it does not lessen and the reason is hastened to it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red copper oxide, and stop the eye just until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as it is inflamed with apostema, then apply a poultice and cure the hot abscess until it is healed; then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it with an ointment, and cut off a part but not all, so that the tears may not come forth.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill into the eye a red collyrium made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the conjunctiva
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The eyes of some men do not always have red flesh, and it covers the pupil and holds steady above the papillae and turns away from the forehead, and seems like a rose of mulberry.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is such that the patient places their head in your hand, then works the eyes, and binds all that flesh with suitable cords to it, and holds it with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first layer of skin, and go on cutting all the way to the razor's edge, and take care that you don't injure the eye in the work;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be like the spatula that we have said in the incision of the ulcer and with small forces one can remove the scab, as the form shows after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of sainfoin broth or where you distill red vinegar and similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and put on top of the eye a cloth with egg white, so that it may be assured of an aposteme hot;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains unattended, and the blood surges up, and you doubt an abscess is hot, then leave off the eye and treat the hot abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make the sore join together in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nonetheless, you should hasten the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and by the accidental way, in iron work;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from this treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red when they are covered on the eye, and tolerate the work of their sight and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary for you to first look at the eye, in which the swelling is, is big, and there is no other disease besides the swelling.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then cool it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your care, then stop those veins at all costs according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle and double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two eyebrows by degree in one flesh according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then compress those veins subtly and stop the blood an hour after another, until you see those veins move away from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not stain the eye with the points of spittle, and do this work at the hour of noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not spoil those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains in the sable.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are unable to compress everything in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are eased and you are assured of the abscess being hot, then resume according to this manner which is before, until he is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and that's the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the pus of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physician is called "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you cure it by cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there must be a reason in him that you cut on the abscess, there where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument that is there in its form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "asperge chief", and be made of fine iron indented in the same chief again, and pointed like a file as it is in its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and make so that at any time, then restore the place of medicines exactives.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the wound is bound, and flesh grows there, and the body of the bowstring is bound, and remains so for forty days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and no evil accident comes to it, know that it is sound.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if not, then there is no other remedy but to bring back the fistula to the bottom of the nostril according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone the second time by iron and by old medicines, and when it is uncovered take the force according to this form, and let the point of the iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be thinned out to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the edge of the forehead, and remove your hand from the eye socket, then turn back to the force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the vein goes in if they hold their hand on their nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened the places, so the matter goes into the night.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are fully open and there is no hindrance or decrease in the night, it is necessary that you hold the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the wound, then put poultices or hot cloths to suck, then apply on top of the eye a mixture made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye and plaster it with bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes have need of.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain above with a strong bandage firmly, and reapply the poultices to suck without hurting.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the poultices and leave the oil constricted day and night, and if the swelling increases, so it is necessary to bind tightly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the binding after a day and a night, and if you see the oil repairing itself, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	so reapply the plaster and cloths and the binding and poultices until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the bursting of the eye's skin
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come to the open vein, then opening, and comes forth like little pieces of resin, and it is appalling to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it closing, the operations are such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then thrust another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the wound.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then tie the thread of the double thread around the joint and bind a part of the vein around it, and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and put on the oil-soaked linen cloth in abundance of egg white.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it so that the thread takes hold with the vein, then care for the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and at no time is the wound restricted by the vein each part of a cloth circle until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes give a great appearance, then make an incision at the subtle spatula that comes from inside the oil, and drain the moisture with albugine and lower the eyelids, and enter it soon.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then pull out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not except in the eye which is gathered together, resembling a water descending, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of appearing of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the boil come up above to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and not descend, and allow the light to fall on it, and see the patient's things as he used to.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the boil's descent is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	then make the patient sit in your hands, then take the subtle spatula and insert it on the keratinized skin up to a little above the conjunctiva with the keratinized membrane and crown, until the boil issues.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is released, so it drips in hot clear water mixed with honey or with vinegar and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the likenesses of waters in our division, and what is necessary for piercing;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if one works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind the good eye very tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand if the eyes are left, or in your left hand if the eyes are right, the instrument called "almagda".
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a finger in that spot above the eye to the part of the lesser tear; then insert the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces into the blenchor of the oil, and sense that almagda comes to the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is fitting that the measure of the way Almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the purl to the end of the nourishment.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the parchment crown, and then place the instrument just above where the water is, then press downwards on one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	The patient sees water flowing now, so the patient sees it before him and the instrument is in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting for a little while, and if the water rises back up the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not go up, then extract Almagda gently by turning your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then place in water a small amount of gemstone jelly, and leave the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put aside the oil that is soaked in wool or linen moistened with rose oil and a quantity of egg white, and tie it with pure oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our time, apply cooked broth with a lot of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and not go too far inwards, but make a subtle hole, then put in alumada, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient and doctor to come, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be still from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not necessary to do this in the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but rather you should wait, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess appears, instruct that one to open their eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is appeased, then open the eye and put a poultice on their face to cover any day, and be there in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then go out of the dark house step by step, and turn back into one's usual state;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from the land of Yemen who told us that in their country they used to make a certain type of bandage that would help with swelling, but I have never seen any such thing in our land nor do I ever read about it in ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are likenesses of the forms of epilepsy, because he who does not know them sees.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and are properly of stone;
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let their heads be of the same subtlety, and their ends in three angled aqueducts.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh from the nail
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No times are born or arise without diverse lumps attached, because there are some that seem like scorpions at many points;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such or is encrusted with flesh of a fiery color, and if the lump is soft of a white color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that then of these lumps which is soft and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and work his nostrils, and pour the wine onto those lumps, and treat them with fires;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then apply what you can sustain to the spatula of fine cutting on one side, as long as you know that lump is entirely loosened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, then cut it off with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it does not bother you, or abscess forms, then cleanse it as it is fitting;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it as much as the blood is poured out and all the pus is removed, then pour on some water or cold wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the poultice does not work, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone newly formed above the bone, to which instruments do not come to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread about an inch thick in it, and have it well greased by hand, and have between each night's space a little interval or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's head into the cloth of the nettle in their own power, and pull it out in an aromatic way until it comes down through the nose into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times do this with children at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after another just as we do on the cloth;
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as long as you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, stop the bleeding, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back into the nose just as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the salve corrodes all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on a new bandage made of linen some days until it is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, so use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and medicines or bandages:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is of silver or of iron, resembling an open lamp like a candle, and guides also;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make a bandage closed, and the instruments full to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have some cloth at the head to hold it in place when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh from the nail
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times there occurs on the head a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great over time, until it becomes something to behold by looking at it;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the affected part at the beginning, and remove all the decayed matter, then put on the cauter or burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you wait to cover it until it is large, then be aware if it is hard, with a faint color, poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	so do not touch it at all with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut into it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not with faint color, and you see that it can be fully cut away, then empty the patient and cut it away without fear, and treat the joint in things constricting and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nail is cut off and cleansed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Knows that when solutions of continuation come in one of these joint workings, it profits little, rather than in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, one must then see what happens to each, so look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then place the two lips together with a suture, and then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their crust until they heal, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and bind it, and powder on top of powder with dragon's blood, and burn incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powder a piece of plastery ointment or another ointment sticking together, and leave it until it cures by itself, then anoint with oil until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way of the stitching is that you assemble the parts:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	of the apostemes of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In many cases there are within the lips abscesses that are hard and resemble grains of mustard, smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and incise on each side, and take up with tweezers and cut in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply oil to the wound after the vitriol incision, until the blood is stanched.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then ease the joint, and treat the bone with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times a whitish substance appears on the gums which the old people call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	so it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the flow of pus or blood continue.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the bone vinegar broth, or other drying and restraining powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, and it happens many times, then cut it again, and cauterize it;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are foul and rough.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes teeth are black and yellow and green, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	so you should make the patient sit in your hands, and his joints be in thy faith, and receive the teeth or scabs as they appear, until there is nothing left.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make a powder of blackness and greenness, and of yellowness and the other taints, until they are purged.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if you remove what is at the first reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	unless this, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to remove, according as the work shows, because the scraper which one uses to remove teeth has other forms than he who uses it between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others shall be equipped with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, for this should not be done hastily.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance just up to that point where one has no excuse for regret.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you are certain about the pulling tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain would drive the patient mad, and think it was from a tooth of Saint, and make someone pull out the good tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not depart from him because of this, until the bad one is removed, for we have already seen that it happens to these saints.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you cut around the tooth to the whole gumline strongly in order to keep the gums from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it to your fingers or with subtle forceps at the first pace and pace, until it is well separated, then firmly secure the forceps;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's joint be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump forth, then take one of these instruments and insert it lightly into each part, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and wounded, you should fill it with cloths, where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you strain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to cover carefully around the gum for dislodging the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And it does well to guard that you do not break it, and one part remains, and returns to the patient through the wickedness of the root with greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And take heed that you do not act like the foolish healers who, through their haste and boldness, sometimes break the carriage and do not bring what we have told;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but often bring great harm by the extraction of roots that remain or by breaking the carriage, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is loose, wash the place with vinegar or asparagus and seaweed;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol powder;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that doesn't work, burn it with a cautery.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of extractors, by which one removes the teeth first, should be long and pointed with thick handles, so that they do not break when you pull out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick handles so they do not bend when pulled, and be well made of iron, and have teeth to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the roots remain in the socket, it is necessary that you put a moistened cloth soaked in butter on the place for one or two days, until the socket becomes softened, and then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems like a bee's stinger;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and be made inside like a file and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be big and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out for this reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, from which forms come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument having two handles, by which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles great forceps, by which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and wise and subtle masters find by themselves the instrument that suits them best, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if it does not break on the cartilage or other bones, or wherever it can, one should seek out the instruments that are needed, as I have said, and be aided by gestures, from which comes the form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well-held to hold the bone, lest it escapes, but be able to hold and remove.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if it has putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so treat it with all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural shape of the body, and their form is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly grown after the previous one, and is not in its rightful place, and cannot be straightened or filed:
adonques lou raie;	then draw;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is rough with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is shown here, and resembles a small beak, and be of iron with a sharp point in the tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file files and files a little by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and for that you do not move the others, and if it appears to be able to be filed, then file with a similar file which has this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like a file used to make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in lime the tooth becomes less and less heavy day by day, so it does not move until it falls out;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the tongue becomes smooth at the end with no roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the roughness so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth is knocked out or falls out through percussion or falling, and the patient cannot eat what they want without choking, and you have treated them with constricting medications, and this does not help;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	so they must be restrained by a thread of gold, for the threads of silver become green and putrid, but the gold ones never change;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the middle thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	et if you wish to straighten the teeth, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the head [of the thread] between my teeth, if there is one or more of them, until you come to bleeding just up to a healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then begin the covering just to the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and bleeding, until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your cord be tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then bend the ends of the thread into pincers, and join them together, and reattach between the healthy tooth and the toothless one, so that it does not wound the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it thus tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, then bind it with another string.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remained and served thus all its time, and that is the form of the teeth and the shape of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and doesn't meddle with it unless one is wise and skilled, and sometimes makes the form of a whalebone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a deficiency, and holds it so as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of removing the ligament from the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	At no time does this happen that comes from under the tongue or natural origins, unless one is born so;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accidental wound that has been stitched up;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you will operate on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your healthy hand, and lift up the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then tie the ligament nervously to the wide one, so that the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, it is a sudden wound, then bind the bandage and tie the ligament.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and make sure that the incision is not too deep in front, for the artery which is below;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done that, lift the lever of rose and easy water, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and keep the patient's tongue wrapped each night, so that the wound cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if hemorrhage comes forth, then put a vitriol plaster on top of the wound;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood swells, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery which is good for that;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then the doctor of another doctoring until he is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a boil that's yellow or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it at all, for it's a carbuncle;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it's declining into gangrene, and there is moisture, then one must lance it, and the pus will flow out in a subtle spatula-like manner, and deliver it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood flows against your work, then put on a vinegar poultice until it is stopped, then return to your work as long as you are treating all parts;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the limb from ease and from strain, and treat other treatments until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes a boil comes inside the throat called "godath", and they are properly called two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If this is a postulate of small sense and of fusel color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the roots are large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the dismemberment of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it is dead, and then you will take it apart, or it will break apart by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and the roots are subtle, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first make sure that the postulate settles down and is pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his hands be in thy right hand, and open the mouth and take hold of the tongue between thine own hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, thereby is the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it shall be of silver or of subtle lead, just like our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and pierce it into the almond, and pull it away above as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not take anything from the cloths with it, then cut off at the instrument, so that is its form, which seems like one of great force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and yet the head is curved, and one way against another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	and be cut on one side and not on the other;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and hot and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water or cooked pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment until he is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat except for the two almonds, so cut them then as the two almonds are equal.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was growing inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and I had nearly closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she stayed like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two pustules through the two holes of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then hastened and made an incision in one place, then the abscess burst open, and drew out a great portion of pus.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made another incision on the other side of the abscess, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After applying the poultice to these abscesses, and taking out a part of it, and no more came forth except for a small amount of blood;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the passage of the throat in the woman was stopped, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at this abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess recrossed again, and filled the place that I had emptied, so that it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I bandaged it and cautery was done inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	and thus it stopped growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left those parts, and only God did anything with them after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the swelling comes down to the eye, and it is swollen and long, then it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if she is under a large and rounded one, so it is called "uvē".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When she is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and she is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut her out.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and she is sanguinary or of a red or black color, then it is necessary that you avoid making an incision on her.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, then, when you see her, according to the manner that I have said, of her length and thickness, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have made a record of previously.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the pessary into the uvē, and train it downwards, and cut with both instruments which I have said in the incision of two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you not cover at all more than the excessiveness that is beyond the natural boundary.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cover more, you cause harm to voice and word.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being covered, you should use artifice at the cauterization to calm their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and thin.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses the tongue onto the instrument which we said in the chapter of cauterization, and confess with live water cold, so that it is not too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use the point of this instrument, as to which there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have on your head a beard or place where you put the medicine, just like the hairs of a comb, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the ulcer.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should be seated on his couch, so that the saliva and spittle run from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and the wound.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the ulcer, for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it congealed and the pustules of the medicine are appeased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the entire cotton in the sheath above, until the cotton adheres to the ulcer.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and repeat after 3 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to start again the cauterization of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cauterization, clean around the ulcer with cotton soaked in butter, and purify everything that is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be treated with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, not the fire cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured through fumigation in this manner, take calaminth and ysoop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put a little bit in it, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot be well glazed with hard earth, and inside the pot have the instrument shaved according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And be of silver or lead, and let one of the keys be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is deadened;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	afterwards it often begins again, until the eye dries, and be sure that you do not do this at the beginning of the swelling of the abscess, for many things happen there;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make them do anything except at the decline of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if these instruments are not present, take a cord and put a candle made of egg-white inside the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the candle made of egg-white does not let the vapour weigh on the mouth, and it is a good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times one uses at the throat or spine of a fish, or something else;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not open for you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit at once when the meat is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if the harsh things come out through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a dry bread crumb;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and then thread is tied to the sponge, and then it is swallowed again;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the stomach, if it stays, then you will pull out a lot;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of forceps according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And be the instruments curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high upwards;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest all life come forth, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and be careful that the patient pushes the instrument, because it is better for the thing to come out forced;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the bag is below, or he pulls it far away from all the instruments evenly, until it is far.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the discharge from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	There is no bloodletting in medicine, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not benefit at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue onto the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sweat, so treat it with a small bandage or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, then take a knotted cord, and put it around the patient's throat, then tie the knot in the cord hot with fire, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is afflicted by water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it with his hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if blood soon feels the water, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not stop as we said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the ear;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	It happens many times, for she will fall without warning.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has coal ashes, and the cover is covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole is the key of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the sweat.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and now the sweat falls, and if it doesn't fall, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers from thirst, and takes bitter and salty things, and does not drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it becomes necessary for him to go away by means of this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one draws out the pus is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for entering the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has a resemblance to a doctor's beak, and it has a roughness like limestone, such that what it takes, it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and thus is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many kinds of abscess are, according to what is remembered hereafter on both sides in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, one being its own resemblance, and because of the moisture it holds.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those who are at the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the fatty tissue are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if an abscess is not to be pierced, until the bow has been measured according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are dry, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses which are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and one leaves them until they are rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why it is a cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is below the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is mortified, it will harm the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where it is below the foundation, if one pierces it even when it is dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess that is unripe and undigested, except for the one below the foundation, lest it will not penetrate far enough and be prolonged inside, and a fistula will ensue.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in due time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforating the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the softening and healing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you place the puncture or more dependent upon the abscess, and where it opens up movements;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the puncture should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pain.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	Those who are bent, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in its natural place, you should leave the opening so that it is confirmed by complete digestion as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce before this, the body will be lengthened with blood from it, and filled with much waste matter.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and the deep parts of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limb has need of it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring forth small abscesses, small ulcers;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in great abscesses, great ulcers, and many splits according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to search out the cause, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become like a piece of cloth that is worn out and is dead, so one should do the same thing with babies:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if it has such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones which one cuts away like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses from the kidneys;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if it has such ones where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar coping.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, like a soft and superficial abscess, it is necessary that you let them drain freely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, and you let it drain, if you do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but rather one part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not touch anything above it;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do right by many times bit by bit, until the bowel empties completely.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	likewise if the patient has little strength, or women bearing, or small children, or old men who are worn out.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits leap away at times with the exit of the bow; so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take heed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Then therefore proceed with great caution through this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it's a clean cut, then try to apply some linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it's a large abscess and there are many perforations, then you must pack each one with a tent so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin and you have wrapped it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or a clean cloth without moisture, and bind it just until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the surgeon, and the doctor of ointment, until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleedings occur in your work, so provide cold water and easy, and damp cloths, and set it on the bleeding place by many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the flowing of blood persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said to put in hands in this book, and if it is in the season of spring, and the flesh or abscess is very nervous, then you must put on tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the flesh is fatty, then you must put on wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then release the abscess and the pus and the wound, as it is necessary, until he is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of blisters
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when the hair of the head comes forth small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in wefts, as a tailor of a silk, and there is much of the same.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fat and such that also have moisture like pimples;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are others that are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt that the artery will not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you try out every instrument called an "entromissoire", from which its form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then heat it above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape away without leaving anything of the skin that contained that moisture, for it returns again if you leave anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then plunge in Egyptian oil if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, then in water and vinegar, and apply the dressing to the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those who remain will run with night dew.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of night dew.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of oiling as is necessary, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds little fat, cut it according to this shape, from long.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and scrape out the ulcers, and flay off all around, and put all your care of drawing forward from where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery does harm to you, do what I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is pustular, and to cut and to cure as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on top of the pustular abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, for they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and one of the abscesses that I cut open was on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had cut into it, they would have made as much of a wound as in a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming from the head, except those that come to the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, in order for the pus to issue forth.
et les cure si com il covient.	and it is cured as is fitting.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and below the armpits, and in some groin areas; sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are very large, and some are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly inside its own coat, like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and similar things to these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one then which you see of good disposition to be touched, and is like in color to the flesh, and quiet on each side and is not harsh against the nerves of the neck or the artery or the canal, and is not too deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	so it is necessary that you cut above, and flay each part, and there are two lips of the key on the nodes, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	et the wound is small and small, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let it not be the spatula awkwardly nor trenching, lest your hands escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound a vitriol poultice, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it so that the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then look at your intended result to see if there are any small scrofulas remaining, if you cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if the boil has a great vein at its root, then it is not necessary to cut that boil in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall away by itself without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the wound to old cotton dipped in Egyptian oil, then the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cure the scrofula, then it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound, and sew them up now, so that there is no longer any excess remaining due to the great size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	so it is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it, and pull tight, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those boils that have superfluity, puncture there where it appears more.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and puncture it in the same way as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply poultices with oil and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment to the raw flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	From shrinking
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	It is necessary for those who have swallowed that the cut in the throat which is called "epiglote" should be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and the patient's major blood vessels are inflamed in those who have an abscess in the mouth or throat or in both testicles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the body, it is necessary to cut off the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision of the syphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and it is so necessary for the cutting of the epiglote that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough to drain.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full extent, then cuts the leather until it comes to the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid shedding blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the superficies, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the splitting of the gum of the gallbladder which bursts through the broken joint and by the failure of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the open wound for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour is passed that causes doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the jaw, and sew all the way to the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Abacus says one does not do this just yet until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the default leads to failure.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four; then they command to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maid take a knife, and she thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the veins of the throat.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was summoned to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor led forth but the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and stitched the wound, and cured her until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happened to the maid that she lost her voice, and returned afterwards to her normal state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish-yellow color, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	naturals, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	it has no natural contrivance
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two manners, of which one is similar to us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it has fear, and does not need to work on making fires except in that which is small, and examines and searches all the internal parts;
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it just like in a wound, and cannot be helped by any means, then cut it off, as one cuts off the nose, and treat it with all its contents, if there are any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine well everything, and cure it as is proper, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of fat
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of wounds, all of which I will say are similar;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I tell the whole difference that is between wound and abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that warmth and fever persisting, until the ebullition is past, and the purging is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and warmth subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the nose having neither warmth nor fever nor pain, and containing pus which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a jellyfish, and becomes swollen.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their appearances, either fat or moist, and much colored as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of fat, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form comes or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of the nose is that you take or find the most moist place in the abscess, and turn your two pokers back and forth, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the obstruction, and take care lest it jumps again.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture constricts the cord, whatever its color may be, so treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after extracting the obstruction there is no moisture, know that it is fat, then treat it thusly in a cross shape, and take hold of it with forceps, and scrape it lightly on each side and watch the edge where it lies so you can lead it out safely with the needle;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out safely, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, then it will return through many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if even a small part remains and the blood teases you, then fill the wound with some caustic powders, and compress the wound, and put on soothing things, hot abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is great, then cut off both lips of the wound, and treat those who have been injured flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein beats against you or another, and in your hurry and stress, you break off the lead of vitriol, and let it lie two days or three, until the wound has healed, and rest the boiling of blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to closing what remains of the wound.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Behold the forms of the entrails mixed, and they are of three manners:
grans et moien et petit;	great and middle and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three manners:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	great, middle, and small, in order to surround the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are of yellowed earth, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most tried by black lead to encircle the ravens of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the onyches are many in semblance, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if the onyches have two ravens of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if the onyches have three ravens, and are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if the onyches have two ravens, and onyches with only one raven, and are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these things is that one cuts, and there are some who do not cut more than halfway, from which we strip the flesh, because one does not reach the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these intermediaries are the apertures replied in sleeves, so that the patient does not feel a thing when opening abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use more than in a well-warmed place, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and in similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scissors for flax, according to this form, by which one stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that bleeds at the puncture of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Breast swelling occurs in some men when they begin to be corrupted, so much that it seems like a woman's breast.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should treat according to this form until the line .b. to .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and pack the wound with medication allowing for some flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and care for it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs down and is softened because of its size as it is in women, then cut it into two sections above, with two similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is attached to the other at the end of each and contains the smaller line according to this form from line .b. to line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully closed, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decomposition of blood, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it so that the remaining and fat can melt away, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses in the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are types of hard scrofulas or boils, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for it with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then make it as we have said in scrofulous cuts, and if the wound bleeds pus, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, then many times abscesses come to be, and so also happens with the vein inflamed and abscessed.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep inwards.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it to your fingers, then you feel its straining;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, then it is reason to flee away.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolishness to cut this abscess, and similarly when it is under the armpits and in the groin and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary therefore to shun the iron treatment, and he who is at the head must also shun it, and in that which is on the swelling of an artery, one makes a cut above the long leather.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then perform the incision on the skin, and depart the artery gently from the flesh, until it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then put a needle under it and make it pierce to the other side, and hold the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point to the place that is between the two lines of an instrument so long as the blood flows out which is there, and loosen the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the treatment until the bandage falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal those wounds suitable to this, until they are sound.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is caused by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you take what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I told you, or tie one end of both parts to the two heads of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the threads will not come out, then reinsert another needle into all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut off the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut off the superfluidity of the wound and leave what is connected.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses come in an artery and a vein, abscesses of the nerves come when they are wounded or from excessive hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at the joints and in the hands and in all places where there are joints, and it is grievous abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one constrains him strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but below the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it is well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor underneath or above, and the one who is in joints must not be cut with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance I shall see contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin at the armpit.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, one should grasp it with forceps and cut its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, one should suspend it with an incision, and scrape it, then cut out the abscess and put together the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large hanging boils
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	At times it happens in bellies and not elsewhere so far as I know, and it is a disease that is called "fung" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and has subtle roots and a large head.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are some small ones and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, with a small root, and split open and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I coped them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 Z., and the work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthritic area is white and moist and of fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If he coperets with a spatula wide, and be in your presence the fire cauterization.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when cutting comes many great discharges of blood, and if the blood flows too much, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made flax thread, and bind the arthritic area as we have said, and let it be for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain him, and do not cease to strain the flax thread until he copes with the arthritic area, and let it feel his work.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are thick, then there is fear of cutting into the belly itself because of the wind, but you can well cut off the middle part, and then cauterize so it does not regrow;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cure the wound, and take care that you do not cut off the navel which is of a faint color and poor sense and with no regard for milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the care of ulcers later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the bread is burned
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the abscess comes from a cauterized wound or fissure of syphilis and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the issue of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and openly shows its various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is because of the opening of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses it at its sides it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance to the bath and from excessive labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's because of moisture, it's a light thing, and you can see clearly when you press it with your hand, it doesn't resist at all.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it's because of blood, and it becomes apparent by these signs the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it's because of windiness, it is swollen when touched, and the works are such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the wound alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowels, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his anus, and be extended straight out, then sign in every direction around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the spot that you have signed with all the spatula, then cut off half of the abscess above to the great incision.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie around it with a strong thread or a cord of firm silk tightly, and the knot should be well secured.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on the middle of the abscess extended over the thread, and press your finger's indication, and pierce the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it taken from the thread, then loosen it, and push the intestine further out of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bulge, then take hold of it with a forceps, and remove the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein is against you, go around it well, then return to your work and take two needles, and tie two thread pieces, and tie the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it to drain as much as possible, and let the dead flesh be separated by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	ou you cut when it is subtle and porous, then cure what needs to be done, and leave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what needs to be done, and mend the joint.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division about the likenesses of gangrene, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we say that gangrene develops in the bones, and great caution is needed in the treatment, and the ancients say that when gangrene is in a joint or can be removed like gangrene in the breast, or in the armpit, or in similar joints, one should remove it all when it begins;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is great and old, you should not approach it, for I never saw one that could be cured;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	None were ever healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black cholera sometimes.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him well if he has apparent fullness, then have the patient in good condition to do the work.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then wash your fingers or chance, and shave all over, and scrape off all the hair leaving nothing.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or anything, and if the bleeding makes you opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat another wound until he is healed.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicine, and that which is cured by fire.
si est eclites soulement;	only enlightened
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanites and hyposarchy, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	so when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" in medicines, and the cure does not profit, if look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as also distension of the belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one must not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is not too young nor too old, so you must thus proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lift the patient straight up on your hands, and have the attendants press on the belly by thrusting water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine-mold according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be split into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	at the tip, and even if it is not so deep that it can reach the intestine when one inserts it, and cannot hurt it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look to see if the dropsy has spread towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary, then you must cut above the mouth of the third day on both sides under the armpit;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the mouth of the third day;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to dropsy, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on top of the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand to all the fat between the skin and the shank just as when cutting to the quantity of an ear or around it;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the sac as long as the pus comes out at its natural flow, and this is the sign of water, then take it away, and put that instrument in which there is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin silver chain, and it is made of light iron or archaic lead, and has a small depression in the part below.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three depressions;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is the key cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision which the writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top above is the almighty, so that when the instrument comes to water, it now descends on the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then empty then the half or the third part, because if you empty more than is needed at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit from the arm, or he falls face down, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to empty space as the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their hairs;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now because of the key that stops the perforation which is above the siphac, for which I spoke, so you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then begin the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering those things and take out a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this for some days and beware of pouring in until it no longer remains but just a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient and leave out a lot of water, if the remedy of burial or sand is hot, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and if it becomes discolored to drink;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat with drying medicines until he is healed, and apply a fire cautery to the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without a perforation in the penis, or if it is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If this is so, then let it be done at once by piercing all the way through to the very small and subtle part according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then place the patient in a pit or hollowed out space with a subtle layer of mud, and bind him and keep him thus for three days or four, and when he wants to make water, have it opened up and let him urinate, and then replace.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance it does not matter, for the urine that comes forth will not allow it to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	That of which the pit is small, if it has medicines from a piece of lead, as we have said, so it will spread.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have a perineal opening in their place are afflicted, for none are born with a perineum at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis first.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they are unable to relieve themselves because the material cannot come out just to the marriage line, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the instrument and the tip also like the size of a quill, so that the point may be in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and take care to prevent the flowing of blood which often occurs, and if it does occur, stop it with what stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these blisters come on the instrument, and there is an ugly appearance of flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and among them some are malignant and not malignant.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	so it is necessary that you take them up with subtle vinegar, and scrape and clean all of them, then put on moist Egyptian oil.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure him with divine ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of poor color and foul-smelling, then you must apply a cauterizing agent.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and the skin on the shaft is in the flesh and has part inside the peel and part outside, then you must remove the skin that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is sewn, then you should cure what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it all together, then the head of the shaft is not assured that it will not be pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in its shaft and around.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so you should remove everything that is black and corrupted, then smear on it a plaster made of honey and flour that has been prepared from the bark of green pomegranates and vetches, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there comes bleeding, so administer the lunar cautery in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries are helpful in two dispositions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	to wit, for the evacuation of blood and for corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you put a leaden tube or guide on the penis, and have the patient urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the foreskin is inflamed at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or it has been caused by a wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you cut away with the curved instrument, until the adhesions are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a grievous thing to remove them, then it is necessary that you cut away with the spatula or some small instrument at the head of the penis and foreskin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then wash it gently between the two, and put a soft linen cloth soaked in cold water on it, so that it does not become inflamed again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, whenever we do this work of our own will and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcising their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen that the majority of masters and nobles who performed circumcisions around me were strong, and all young.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	So it was that the skins parted because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Then it is necessary to cover it up, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is done below the skin, the tip of the member is not ensured.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and at the cleansing of the ulcer by chance the iron escapes and the work is ruined, and many times such things happen that there is no need for cleansing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is done with force to all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	When you press your hand, make it equal all around as much as possible.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread be well stretched around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first operation is that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only making them wrap the thread around the penis as little as possible, and then let it hang in all ways you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it stay between your hands straight, and bind the force between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and draw it up so that the foreskin of the penis is retracted.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then cleanse it well from the filth that is assembled there, then bind the foreskin with a double thread, then bind under one ligature and another.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and the left index, and tie between the two ligaments, then lift the key above hastily and train the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow a little bit by bit, for it is the mothers;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on top and on the powder I glue it with a yolk of cooked egg, tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh olive oil, and leave it on until the next day, and then treat another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The forms of forces to purification are thus:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two chisels should be held and biting, and the chisels also as great as the thumb in equal measure:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the error of purification is when the keys inside flow out through the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Then you must extend it to your finger, as long as the swelling makes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and file it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then grasp it with pincers, and then file.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they last three days, and what is below the swelling is inflamed, then leave it so that the abscess is appeased, and scrape it lightly.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	and file as you can move, and keep away from the part of the shaft, lest it cause no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Then cure the swelling with sudden wound powder, which we have said or treated in dealing with powders, and if you file too much beyond measure, and it goes above, then it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to constriction of the kidney, or blood being frozen, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is swollen or inflamed at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let them be placed on the back, and stretch his belly from above to the back, and strain the patient's urine as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the kidney above, whereby the urine is released;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be a thin, light-haired comb, like the feathers of a bird.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the thread be one and a half palms long, and fine at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of extracting urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie it at the top to a piece of wool or cotton, and push the top end of the thread into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess of the wool and push it just to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and a little hen's egg white, and make the patient sit on the seat, and lift up his bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and stale water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently place the syringe in the penis, so that it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the mouth.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then insert the syringe before the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide that goes there is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then pull out the thread bit by bit and little by little, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out further, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and reinsert the syringe until the bladder is empty, and soothe the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When bleeding or blood comes into the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, then make all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	She is closed, and if there are three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hairs of the wick are trimmed so that the medicine does not overflow well without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and insert as needed;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the key in the moisture, and draw on the one who is within;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw out the moisture from the chest, and then quickly pull out the draining tube.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moistures enter in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the subtle form of the enema by which one enemas the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it's of silver or archaic, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below that is the breast or where the cord falls;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you use to enema the bladder, then tie it between two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pipe that contains this moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the head of the enema in the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has been released, so that the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a nail, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do just as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	Of stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the difference between a stoned kidney and rainwater, and all signs, and in which stone one should work with a file;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it opens up a hernia, and causes the patient's member to ache, and it pierces many times, and then swells.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and many of these stones bring forth foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is easier for children to recover until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in old men, and is in middle age, to those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by cleansing, in order to draw out all the bad humors that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks any inquiry into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and turn him over and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes falls from its height.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his buttocks, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then search for it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in its place, then hurry now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not yield to the touch entirely, then moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and complete.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and push it to its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, then draw it up to the navel of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press upon your finger, and push it out as far as you see where to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the attendant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command him that he stretch forth with his right hand the testicles above, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the incision.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I insert the spatula-like instrument, because this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And place it between what is between the crevices and the foundation, not in the middle but beside the left edge of the nave.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and your two feet should be at the foundation, and be the shape of the traverse so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	in case the pressure makes the foot at the foundation jump away without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there are stones with angles and margins:
si est griés a issir;	so it is grinded to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there are some that are worn down, resembling a gnat, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To that therefore where it has angles and margins, make the shape larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, then you must stretch on the pincers which are like a file at its head, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you insert below the ly instrument subtle curved at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot bend it thus, then widen the little hole and if the flesh is stripped away, then bind with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stones, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then remove it thoroughly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it must be cut away, and make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine comes out again on the other side where the wound cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but always force it to be drawn or broken with pincers, until you draw it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, so anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then bind the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then arise the flesh with oil and water very well; then care for him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses come to the wound and ulcers, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, which is known in such a way that without surging with urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then pour out your bile into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and harm.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then wash the wound with water, vinegar, and salt, and aid him in all ways you know, until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the works you do to cure him, that you bind his two hips together, and put the medicine in its place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	then cut it as I say, cutting many times, and excuse the cutting for this remedy.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod in the shape and form, with three angled tips fitted into one socket:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and bind it around the penis below the stone, so that it may not come down into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then insert the forest (i.e. a thin stick or reed) into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the forest in your hand back and forth on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then the urine will come shortly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	So is broken, and jumps forth with urine, and is healed the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take a thread and place one end under the stone and the other above, then make the rod meet the stone between the two threads, then pull it forth, and free the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal him until he is sound.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It often happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does so once, then the treatment is grievous, and it is prevented by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perchance the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is that the bone of the woman's arm is more prominent than the bone of the man's arm, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity requires this, you should take a woman well knowing, and find one, and if you do not find her, then don't bother to look for another subtle midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present one is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command regarding the incision of the arm;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to strengthen her back or foundation and search for the bone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if it is true, then constrain it below its due and recommend to her that she must hold her due or with the patient and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder strongly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	and if it is true, then it should be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cord, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and be the first to cut at a small size;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then press the rule in the cut, if you feel the stone so deeply in the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many types of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small ones and great ones and rough and smooth, long ones and rounded, and those with reins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the wound bleeds, then put a bit of vitriol powder on it, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is exhausted, and have tools that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the wound bleeds, and it's from an artery that has been cut, then put powder on the spot and tie with tents and bandages, and do not start again until it has stopped bleeding, and let the stone be and do not try to remove it, lest the patient might die by chance.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rhemaces are nothing other than a collection of moisture or white leprosy, which is under the key of the testicles, that contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of an egg, if one thinks that this is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it's the skin of the scrotum between the white syfac that we said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen unless one is not.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramification is from weakness that comes to the womb, and it spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the scrotum, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it's declining to yellowish, or it's without red, or black, or aquous white, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we said, then it is the abscess reopens, as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the scrotum, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper web, then it is the abscess reopens with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white scrotum, he will know it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it with all the surrounding quarter-circles, because the form is as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the quadrants, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cut it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then bind a cloth around his back, on something about a foot high, and put many cloths under it.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on his right side, and stretch out the probe to one of the two groins of the scrotum.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula left-handed, and cut the skin of the scrotum between it and the long one down to just below the foreskin, and make a straight incision cutting through the skin of the scrotum just up to the white scrotum, and scrape out subtly according to their strength.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the syphac with water at the large perforation, and extract all the water, and then put in your probes, and stop up the syphac above.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the key of the stones, but only the syphac;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it out altogether or in pieces, namely the coat of his subtlety, lest if you do not cut it well sufficiently, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the syphac;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two leaves of the key of the stones with a suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the haemorrhage of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then strap the womb to all the suspensory, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that they are two roots;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then strap the other part similarly to how you did the first one evenly, and clean the wound, and put a moist compress in olive oil on the sore;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another moist compress in wine and oil on top, and place the two wombs on top, and place double cloths above, and tie it all up with a cord according to this shape:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and put woolen threads in the same manner and have them sewn together into the armhole of the undergarment, and one of the straps takes up the foundation to the back, and the other to the part of the shoulder;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two heads on the two angels, and let everything be assembled into the restraint of the bowstring;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes medicine is applied to this cauterization in place of iron cutting, and it is that you take the cauterizing knife, subtly cut the skin around the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white fungus containing water becomes visible;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	so take the cauter according to this form, and pierce that fungus once, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauter;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut it in all ways you can, until you have removed everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be sure the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and be careful about the flowing of blood, and beware the works of cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you contrary, whether abscess or bleeding or other thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horribleness, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs we have said that the vein is good, make the patient sit on a light siege;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spatula-like area, and put the perforation through the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the wound large so that all the pus flows forth;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow forth, then cure it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not let water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a feather or instrument used to treat dropsy in this way;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound and know that the water comes back, and is assembled after six months or around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this reed there are many fears and dispositions, why it seems to me that much is lost if one lets it go.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come in the body, and especially in the groin;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is through great chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive acidity and bilious humor that spreads to the groin or from striking;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and finds no pain, and it is a severe abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are grievous and pitted abscesses, of foul color, and sometimes come from a wound in the artery, or an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is by a wound in the artery, it is known by the warmth of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not become necessary that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	He who is afflicted with an inflamed vein is known by its appearance at the expression of touching with the fingers, and can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on other similar things;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you should cut the key of the swelling, then lift it upwards, and pull out the white ligament, and release the suspensory from all parts of the swelling.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the wound is already sore with new scars, then it is necessary that you treat the wound, and the swelling.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is angry at the spleen or in those things that are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension and the swelling afterwards.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the joint is at the back, then it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a berry bud, with the softening of the skin, and the patient becomes very sick when it bursts.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before it, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of the skin down to your thighs, at all the vessels that are near the pubic area, and take hold of them, and stretch them out strongly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut the sponge trenchant wide at the crossing point near the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then fix an awl where there is the doubled thread, and tie it to the first location where the vein came out, and tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moles.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others that begin in the bowel, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the kidneys;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there is not harm coming, and if all the vessels come to view, then it is necessary to draw the kidneys in relation to all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and are unable to be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the gallstone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this rash are caused by the section that comes from the sweat gland, or the extension above the belly in the area of the groin, for which the intestines descend into one of the testicles;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rash is either from sweat or from extension above it, and there are two ways these things come about due to various causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or jump, or bellowing, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it's from sweat gland extension are that they appear gradually over a long time, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even down to the very bottom, because sweat gland pressure pushes out the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of syphilis, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing underneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue from the intestine and the body being drained of the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the abscesses burst with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which one must take heed.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place with his hand inside the wound, if it can be inserted;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then be mindful on his neck. Between your hands, and lift the hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch the skin above, and cut all the skin of the scrotum to its length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then push the leaves of the bandage into the wound in a way that you need to open it, and be such that the eye can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the suppurated flesh that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the white suppurated flesh is exposed from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then insert your two fingers into the space where the scrotum is, between the white suppurated flesh that is under the skin of the scrotum, and between the second suppurated flesh;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move your right hand into the skin of the scrotum, and lift the white suppurated flesh up to your left hand, and lift the testicle towards the belly;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the attendant to stretch the cloth upwards, and loosen what is above the knot.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and seek at your hands if there is any inflamed or whitish swelling in the intestine; and if you find anything, bind it to the belly beneath.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle where there is thick thread made of nine threads, and sew it in the back part of the swelling which is after the skin of the scrotum;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the cutting, then trim the strings that appear from the sons, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then gather them together one upon another in the shape of a cross, and bind the swelling, which we have said is beneath the skin of the scrotum, with a strong band of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then envelop the strings of the sons, and bind them strongly with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess should not come.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the ligament above accordingly with the first long ligament two fingers' breadth below the key of the joints.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after that, all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is below the skin of the joints, until the blood flows and the bowels move, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moistened wool in oil to wounds, and put it on the joints, and apply the ligament that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilitic discharge that we have said is cauterized after incision, out of fear of blood dismemberment.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leave the ligament until it pulls itself loose;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it does not come loose, then raise warm water and put it on what we have said, until it comes loose;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient ones say that it is made like the twig that is together with the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cutting above and lightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	In some cases a rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the swelling.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not let any of the intestines come out through the anus, and if they do come out, it is little, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if he stays too long in this point, the wound or boil grows, until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the boil which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen, and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is by fire cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is cured in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the rupture to the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the pus that is below the skin and that follows, then take the raw flesh and place it on the apparent surface of the pus.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it into the deepest part of the belly, then cut the two apparent surfaces of the pus on the top of the raw flesh, and cut one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the top of the raw flesh, and do not cut or stretch any other thing from the pus, as I have shown you in the cure of the gout of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then the treatment by wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cauterize the sons, so defile and cure the wound, until it is sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilitic discharge is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more useful in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	The skins of some men are often softened in many places because the humors that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary when one wants to cure him that one makes the patient lie down on his back and scrapes off the softened skin from the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring together the two lips at a seam, and if you see fit, sew first the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then scrape between the seams and treat the wound like others until it is healed, and let the thread go.
dou chastrement	The punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castrations are esteemed in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of them at all in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary only for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	When one is ill-treated in his own sight to answer what is asked when it is demanded of him, and in his own sight to heal.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to use correction on certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and goats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that correction is done in two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by attraction or by splitting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the sinews are softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then taking them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the correction of size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you stretch the beast, and press the skin of the sinews to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike each joint one stroke, when you have well separated them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and I leave no poultice of dry sulfur and the subtle sulfur which is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of correction is worse than that which is done by attraction, because at the attraction something remains from the testicles, and for this reason the beast desires lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermafrodite is according to two manners in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one manner is that between the two testicles appears also like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the thumb also like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the care of man and woman is that you cover all the joined parts and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, men from whom urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, have no care.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A figuration is attached to the natural part on the skin, as long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it just as big as a hand, and that's what it cures.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should paint the excess of the figuration on your hand or nails, and trim it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and don't go too far in cutting, lest blood comes forth from it, and then the cure of another cure is needed until he is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another mark that appears on the mouth of the marris, and it's filled in, and by chance it jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it "disease of the cow" in olden times.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to reset it, as we have said the remedy, and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of the erratic one
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is errant if the natural condition of the woman is not perceived, or if the pustules are small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or an accident by disease that has come to be;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is due to a joined bone, or subtle abscess, or swelling, and it happens in the middle, or in the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and hindering conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is through the look of the gallbladder.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is nearby appearing, seek it at the shoulders or in the breast.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle abscess and it is close to two bones, then hasten and cut thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two middle fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then bring the two bones into form, until the subtle abscess is reduced, and cover the swelling;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take linen, moisten it in oil, and place it on the bone, and have the woman sit at home each day, so that it may not unite.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the fistula is hard and narrow, it is necessary that you cover it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the swelling is of flesh-born origin, then suspend it at the incision and cut.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines that stay blood, such as, dragon's blood, frankincense, and together with many eggs.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a bandage of linen wide, so that the wound cannot close.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be cured by other treatments until you are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when new flesh comes in the margins, it is necessary to cover it according to this manner, unless it is enchanted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an enchanted abscess that is in the margins, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Varicose veins are openings of veins that have become accustomed to being without constraint, and when varicose veins are old they become ulcerous.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have said in the section what resembles them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I diagnose that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not respond to sensation, except perhaps through medical treatment by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the rectum, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then cauterize the ulcer with tongs, and cut into its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then bind his feet to the appearance of an hour, then put it in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood is discharged and comes forth, then make it sit in a decoction of sumac and green apple bark and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment to apply on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stays, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, then make him wear poultices on the back and around the breasts so as not to hurt them;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has healed, then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red and is similar to an ashen head, then it should be covered as I have said before with oil.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then continue with the treatment until they are healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the womb apostemes
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the marriage bed, such as syphilis and stony abscesses and herpes and boils and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in marriage, which is not like the abscesses that surround a boil.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the operation of iron, observe whether the abscess is warm at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red so that you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it subside until the pain is alleviated.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he leans on, and support himself with his back and bring his feet together away from the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then follows the ball game towards the right side, and there are placed the instruments with which one works at the mouth of the marriage, from which afterwards comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you are about to place this instrument there, you mark the first line straight so as to know the depth of the marriage, so that what enters into the instrument does not go too deep and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marriage with cloths, so that the instruments do not cause harm.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he puts the rim of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and one works it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, above the collarbone.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowstring is empty, so you should put damp cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil into the wound;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the marsh, and put one above the marsh and on the clean linen dampened in water or cooked mallows;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the healer after two days of ointment according to this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes lift the marsh and the wound by washing with water and honey, and then with water or lily roots and long aristolochia cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then reapply the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed in a sling, then it's necessary that you avoid cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first at the bedside that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are such when you see the woman descending below and desiring to give birth.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the children hurry to get out.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then you know that this childishness is according to natural form, and the issues beneath his head, and the second joints with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, then it is necessary to gently press his belly so that the child may come out soon.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he descends above his head, then the second joints are with him, and the excesses of his superfluities are purged by good purification.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes it comes above his feet, or above the chest or head, or in his hands, or above his belly, or somewhere else, and is converted by chance on his neck, and by other bad shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	So it is necessary for the ball to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out on its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth in travail, and the virtues of it are weak, then make it sit on a stool, or women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and its natural excretion of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then pour the bail between its two navel strings, which is the form.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the afterbirth, and cut to his navel string until the moisture that is inside comes forth.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and paint the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purgative the woman with fenugreek mixed with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her press and strain with condensation, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	so now the child is still.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are too far apart, then you must bring them together gradually little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then the woman should sit on the siege, and lift her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then remove the siege from the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall while standing;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, then cut open the hands with the knife that is placed beforehand, and extract the child, and bring it back into place;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out onto its feet, then it is necessary to raise it up high;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the foot and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump as far as his thighs, then command her to bend down, and make her stretch out with condishion;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps away, then may God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it slowly and carefully until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it doesn't come away as we have seen, then take mastic of the elder, and oil of sassafras, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the natural of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in cold water down to below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened below, put a collyrium of myrrh on it, and put it underneath, and let her have an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on the stool, then make her cough and strain her mouth and nose, and lightly palpate her belly, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child from its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, I put it into its mother's hands little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then be sure on his neck, and the feet hang down below, and be supported above the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then take hold of the hands above the belly, and lift away the pillows below, until it is aligned down;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not cry out, take his feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and rock the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to take hold until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes out with one hand holding onto something.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then have the woman get up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and lift away her legs well;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then administer the muscle-like thing which I have counted.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not give birth, then make her sit on the siege, and then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and shape it according to its natural figure, and make it protrude, and command her to grasp as the child emerges forward.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child from its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the nurse hold his hand, then turn him a little bit by little bit, and gently ease him;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is equal, then put on the muscle-like thing of aloes and oil, as we have said, and command her to move slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, then make her sit on the siege, and command her to grasp;
et la fai esternuer.	and make it protrude.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner for all the afterbirth.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When he comes forth in this way to the entire joint, then cut the joint at your fingernail, until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child bites its face and neck, so that the skin breaks open and it is not retained, and the child will die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside until you have placed him as it is fitting, and instruct the woman to take hold of him sometimes:
adonques si istra legierement.	then if he stretches lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that triplets are often born, and sometimes four or more.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an unusual thing, nor does it happen rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are an unusual thing, and they do not live if only two can be named;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and they are divided by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue naturally just like one from above, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are grievous, then follow the cure as we have said, and be subtle in the treatment, and do quickly and lightly what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it is worth for one's salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	There are no more than fifteen days formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the doctor knows everything about this, for similar things may happen to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	and do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman after a stillborn child or miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to work by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	so that you know whether the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident or is not afraid of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that the woman be seated on her back, and have her feet inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should apply a thread of two parts to the mother's bed, or she is tied to the bed so that she will not be disturbed in giving birth to the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then moisten the mother's mouth with oily liquid made from aloes and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and medicinal liquids.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put them into the mother lightly, then have her lift up or push out the afterbirth that is conducive to this, and take care that the child descends onto its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the afterbirth comes out into her eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs, and if it descends on its feet, then set it or push it away from the sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he hold the ligature in his right hand, and put the bandage between the fingers of his left hand, and tie all his hand lightly, and place the ligature in any of those places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the ligature:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then place it opposite another ligature, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that there may be movement, and the ligatures are tight enough to hold the movement, as is its form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, then anoint the bail with some oil, and tie it in that part, and draw the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there is none left, then place this ligature or more above, and do so until it all comes out altogether.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the constriction, so you must envelop it with a cloth, until it becomes entirely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then wrap the bandage around the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and thus you must do in the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is strained in the birth, or it has a sharp edge assembled, so you must push the spatula-shaped spine between your two fingers, and make the head and extract the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you should cut it with the instrument which is called "almidach", because the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus do the same if the child has a great natural head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones apart with pincers, and if the head jumps out and it strains at the forceps, so that they are split, until the liquids which are in the issue come forth.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot come out, so cut her apart into sections as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if he is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if he is strangled in the belly or at the chest, then it is necessary that you loosen him from the wrapping cloth on your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make a cut in the belly or the chest, until the moisture which is there flows out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is pulled off and the head remains, then put the bail's hand into the farthest part of the wound, and pull it to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then put in one or two fingers and pull him forth.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is constricted because of hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to struggle, but rather prepare things moist and greasy.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the plasterer should prepare ointments, and six in softening and moistening waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then plaster as we have said in a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot, then take it apart piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then plaster as we have said in abscesses that come to the swelling;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if there comes forth blood flowing, it should be put into water restraining it, and another plaster applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had contained a dead child, then she consulted with another about that one, and rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to cause great turmoil.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster with strong traction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, because the womb has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wish the wound, and in bringing together several bones, until the woman was in a better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman stayed thus for a long time, and then occasionally came forth a little pus from the wound;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I do not recall this chapter being opened except for this reason that when the master finds an unusual thing he knows how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	of returning the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Next comes the shape of the pressure point, by which one reads the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns on both sides of both shoulder joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the combs should be more subtle than the restricting one, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the fist should be about two hands wide, and the edge of the trees one palm and a half long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two joints there should be about half a palm or a little more of space;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joints are joined in the mouth of the fist to open when one turns the two combs.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, made more subtle and light-like, should be fashioned from boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have two notches, just like you see, one palm long and two inches wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the opening of the uterus at all instruments, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet spread apart and her legs open wide, then insert the two notches together into the uterus, and hold the head of the instrument under between her hips;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the instrument, just like you have done with pincers evenly, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the uterus, until the patient makes it as she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted and have multiple shapes;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the mirrors are prepared, then the work is all the more hasty and higher for men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to retain her urine and then have it stirred with conditions, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she does so because of that, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then I take a poultice, and make a patch or covering, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cascioline, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs or some of them being cooked or steeped in water above the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then place a cloth or patch on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the womb, and tighten it so that the fumes come inside the womb;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then let it be estranged, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine heats up quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this cure and is not fully healed, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musk mallow of hawthorn, and then apply it in its natural state, and ask for the second time.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the hairs do not hinder the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but make it move slightly to the right and left, and then draw it.
si venra et se desaerdra.	and so it will come and become disarranged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the hair is too narrow, we have said the treatment for estrangement and the fumigation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she does not follow all that we have said, then be careful not to make a mistake while drawing.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marriage, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then anoint with ointment four-pharmacologist.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it will permit and restore, and comes forth;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when she permits this, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So it is necessary then to perform suitable fumigations for that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no ancient has proven the effectiveness of fumigation with dandelion and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it seems like a chain, and one places the head subtly in its natural state, and the large joints above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the lice until it is wasted, and then start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle signs.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that subtle sign at its due time, and not let it be pierced by sharp instruments, and guard the position so she does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a moist linen cloth in vinegar and oil, then treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, put a cord of flax into the wound and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this stopping occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	So then it is necessary to cover that sudden swelling:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it be cured, as we have said about the knot of flax.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are swelling, and grow larger than those that come from above the foundation or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that swelling is old, so it works, and with more moisture awakens white or subtle pus, and sometimes these abscesses persist;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are accompanied by this, that it either empties out or vents itself when the patient makes an evacuation, and possibly jumps into one's face.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if these abscesses penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach just to the junction of the buttocks, and just not the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows that the abscess persists at the fundament, and does not persist:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and is that you push your index finger or fundament, and push in a subtle needle of iron or steel into the abscess when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistiness, then push in a subtle awl or horsehair, until you feel the awl or hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and he does not come with a perforation or ejection of wind or pus, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not penetrate.
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or the urethral canal, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes right up to its place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the cause of the pain surrounds it, then it goes to the back, and no medicine or poultice by anointing is worth;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In one that is not Persian and not old, there is hope of recovery by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and let the patient's legs come down to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pitch a tent of clay or if there is twistiness, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you should place your two fingers there, if then the tent has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh or fat, then know that it is purulent;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says that some can indeed be healed, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help one gives is to cauterize the subtlety of the abscess according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and make the poultice hot in the fistula, until it comes to the foundation.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this twice or three times, until you know that these charred fragments are burnt, which are similar to a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then apply oil from moist tents in butter, until that charred fragment comes out, then apply ointment anointing the wound and closing it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, otherwise it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent goes in and does not pierce all the way to the doot which is at the foundation, and there is a dense covering of char or of flesh between your skin and the tent, and you see the fistula on the surface that closes the covering of gold.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	so cut at the beginning of the fistula, and put afterwards before the tent, and then apply the cauterization after, until it comes to the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be freed the tent, and falls;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then define those deformed nails that seem like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood increases, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauterization brings together two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these deformed nails, and the drying up of blood and the evaporation of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the wet tents with butter or bruised herbs, until the pus flows out, and let the burned nails fall into the pus;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound of the swarming sores that form hard flesh, and are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then insert your finger into the fundament and feel around.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent and between two is the cloth or the syphac or nails, where it is close to bursting, except there are fires that go by faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	You cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bone, or if you can, you put tents and care for it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the tenant who holds the foundation, and the evacuations will come by chance without intention.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then care for it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is sound, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut near the foundation, by tent or by another appointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse that flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And some times fistulas are according to this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you set up the tent in the fistula, and it is on the outer side of the foundation below the skin above, so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put one twisted thread into two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is torn in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that perforation, so that you set your tent or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and draw the head of the thread, and tie together the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it occasionally, until the threads have worked their way through what is between them, and separate;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, except if it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to cut too far down and then cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spaticular spine from which one makes a fistula is very rough, one side and jagged;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side not, because of which it does not cut at all that which one should not cut at all, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Dislocations are according to two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in court blood comes, and there is one or multiple, and they go outside the foundation and to the top of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are outside have little moisture, and in court or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch and lie down in chambers until the foundations come out, and then the sons appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	so hasten, and take it with pincers, or hold it to your nail, then cut into its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligaments cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and strain them to your fingers, then chop, and powder on some hot powders that are in place of cauterize;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cauterize, then cure other wounds until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then purgative him with a biting and harsh purge to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it may come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient becomes inflamed, and if the thread is pulled too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and that you grasp them with your finger or with pincers, and chop, then cure as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you bring the stitching in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take I twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, so that it is of width.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for correcting the excess of blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a damp cloth soaked in oil or cerot on the foundation, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let him be until he has purged, and when they are purged, so treat him with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the dryness of the fiend or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that dryness of the intestines occurs, and due to constriction of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you cut at the tip of a spatula or with your fingernail the scab above, which does not let it moisten.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then care for him as long as he is sick as necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot recover, then resurface the sore even stronger than before until he heals a little and is purged;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then care for him as long as he is healed.
dou fremit	of the shivering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A fungus is a small imperfection located outside the body and goes very deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it freezes through to the bone, and one feels it as much as dead of numbness, and comes throughout the body, and more in the arms than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a goose quill or a strong peacock feather and place it on the numbness, until the circles purple the numbness entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the quill until you cover entirely the numbness, and put it deep inside, and draw out the numbness from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then do this with a file of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and drawing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	not to pierce, but rather to hold firm at two, and to press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, then cauterize the tremor, as it is written before or in this chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a purgative
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	One never makes a poultice with silver or archaut, or melted tin or maillet;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and one never makes any of these small and great instruments, according to the method by which they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then which are used in the care of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of a purgative small and great is thus broad or the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if there is a deviation or the bowels are tied, as you see, and the head inside pierced;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has two holes on one side and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the bowels are tied with medicines from a deer's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around by small holes, and has between each hole one span of distance, then pour in these holes one strong thread twisted in X or eight times around, and assemble the belly as if it were a kid.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, bind it to the instrument with a strong thread, then cleanse.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white or something similar, then fill it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the assistants should squeeze it together with both hands as long as it is fully full, then extract the clyster, and lift the patient's legs up high, and if the medicine wants to come out, so hold on as long as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps all night again, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you purge in a disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the subtle form of the cystic swelling above which the skin is strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will say the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by striking with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a lance or bow or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head that are simple, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from striking with stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you are lightly doubting of hot aposteme:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If he makes it so soon heal from the head wound itself if it comes out with blood from the wound, and the wound is healed on the opposite side of the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and instruct the patient to drink full of wine and eat big meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, then his meat should be thinned out and he should not drink wine or eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if an abscess comes to it, a moist cloth soaked only in rose oil or in wine vinegar.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh and still has all its blood, and it is not affected by air or moisture, which I will say more about shortly.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the ulcer has been moved by fire, then put some ointments on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, so bring them together by suturing, as I will say about belly wounds, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is discovered to be in the bone, and penetrates, and holds only by a little, then cut it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten flesh and it's not touching the bone, then cut off all the rottenness, and empty it out, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if he has an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stanched by medicine, then tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and you put this powder that sets it so as the fire has changed it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of this powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take a part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	take three parts of living coal, and powder it subtly, and fill the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then tie it well, and let it stay untied, if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does not do this with coal alone, except when one has no incense nor dragon's blood, but only when the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has changed the wound, indeed so it is, then do not put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put some digestive ointments or polts made of wheat flour, water and honey on it, until it flows freely;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue with other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or an artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a hernia, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the hernia and makes it retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and put nothing cold on the wound, because the substance of hernia is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be soft, like chalk washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and wash the wound also in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist anointings.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind with bandages, then treat until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is bald and full of pus, then pierce or cut lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is severed, and blood flows forth, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is severed, or the trachea, and the conduit is preserved, because the flesh will go forth, then cut the throat above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then restrain it properly, and let it be for some days, then cure it with ointments as long as it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it out.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all you can, and those that you cannot remove, let them remain until the wound is purged, and the issue is opened and loose.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, powder on powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's a wound from an arrow or sword, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are any signs of festering that the patient should be alarmed about.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it's not deep and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put any powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it up by the blood that doesn't flow forth, but rather let it flow back to the heart, and kill the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attracting unguent, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you don't have unguent, put old cotton in the wound to absorb any moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart nor unnatural convulsions;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it with poultices and other treatments, until he is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal or produce pus, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the cure is done as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the arm or back, then cure that which is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, by suturing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, by powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the parts if they are separated.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not cleansed, then let the wound rot, so it will ease the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound sometimes the intestines or the membranes of the intestines burst, which causes the introduction of pus.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suturing is more troublesome, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one, therefore one should insert the intestines gradually, rather than inserting them suddenly.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, and so they enter more gradually, and therefore it is better to move the medium wound, because one should return the intestine to its place as with other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common forms occur in the hernia of the belly, and the wound of another part of the body and two other proper forms are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and yet they are more proper with the hernia of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine comes out, and a gentle thing is needed to restore it, this is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak an esponge or cloth in lukewarm water only, or you boil it in water with squinat and cypress and spike, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and at times this wine restrains, and is necessary to remove the swelling so that it may be deflated.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling departing, then wash the intestine with water or broth and boil well, for by this means the entrance to the wound is prepared for little things.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make the wound a little larger with the instrument with which one cuts off hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to cut away excess skin, so that no one should cut without great necessity there being.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside the curve and do not remove it, and see where the shape is.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps forth, set it back in its natural form to its proper place if you have the power, for this is a movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	et s’elle est in the part below the belly so sets the head and breast higher than the parts below and also if there is a wound of the belly in one of the two parts so sets one’s attention on what the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is fitting to remember what I say about great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Small wounds apply what is familiar to you, then take with your hands the poor minister who holds all the wound in his hand and close the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and it is the common manner of stitching, and that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound about two fingers' breadth, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two keys of the skin with the two keys of the slipper, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and tie together the two heads of the slipper fourfold.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the strain of a double thread is wrapped around the needle's point on both sides, then the two edges of the wound are brought together properly, and then leave a gap of about two fingers' breadth, and put in another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread of the cloth in the same way you did the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to what need you have of needles, until all the wound is restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and be the needles of suitable size, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore it is necessary that they be of a suitable size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then bind the heads of the needles so they do not bother the patient at night; and I put tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and let them stay until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this manner of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second sewing is common, and it is that you join the two heads of the leather and the two heads of the silk together with a needle where there is a strong middle thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced all four heads together, then pull the needle through at the part where you started, in the way that one sews fabrics.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitching, about the thickness of a minor coin;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitching is for men, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width large, and the intestines were torn two palms' widths long, and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been gone for 24 hours, and the wound was closed 15 days later, and I cared for it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal him with oil, for I was in the region where one could not find it, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and placed gauze over the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and insert it from outside into the part that is inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the correct point in a straight line, then pull out the end of the siphon or cutting or where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce on the other side into the inside part up to the outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier makes pelts, and that you leave once the siphon from one side and then take it up again on the other, until the stitching is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly, is such that some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the ends to the other end, in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	thread an awl or needle nearby, and make a hole only in that place, and leave the two ends of the suture.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the outside to the inside part, up to the two ends of the suture.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make it pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside part, in two other holes of the needle that are on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this word, and others testify to it, so one should sew the belly with two needles, or there be thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is near the belly, then the incision is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the heat has changed it, then you should return to the intestine and the flesh.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put powder in jamming charcoal, and if the heat has changed it, then put on some ointment that is at hand, until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and stitch the thread, and sew up the stitches, and the gauze.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you don't have medicine, put this on, as soon as it starts to push out pus, old rags, and move it twice a day until it is clean.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not make a commonwealth to principal members, then it is necessary that you mix a little bit of lanolin in temperate heat oil or in rose oil, and put it around the wounds, and underneath the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or purging in the bowels, and many times happens, then cleanse with black vinegar, and likewise if the purging comes just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and probe within, and know that when it is the large intestine, then it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the weakness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to those of natures.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the suture jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place just as the intestine is repaired; while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and turned green or black, then you must bind the place that is black so that no blood comes from there, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then tie what is between the ligature, and place the two knots below the wound until it is full of blood so that the extraction may be eased when the sutures fall out, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was wounded in the stomach by a spear.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and in it there was discharge and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I will the patient according to what I can, and did not cease to subtlety until he was cured, and the limbs were set.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient might have harm in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take fresh figs, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the fig has opened the mouth, place it above the two lips so that it straitens its mouth above;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then tie the head, and it will remain so that he cannot untie it, then put another fig after in this manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	That intestine is adhered to the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this intestine thread that is quite clean-shaven, and then bind it to the end of this thin linen thread, twist them together, and then push the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it in a knot.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the groin's intestines, then there is no remedy nor salvation, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it begins to fester, is universally called a "fistula", and similarly when it breaks open and flows.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the natural nodation which is hard and white, or where one does not feel pain, and it is also curved like the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes with a clear bow, and other times dense;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no scar, it is due to one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to know, by the slightness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard scarring inside and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and is drained by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicine in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary that I should make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the syphilitic, or from the intestine, or from the bladder, or from some of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it occurs in the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are like this are of grievous sanitation, and there is nothing but hard labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the place I said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to understand it, then take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, so that you seek it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, then seek out a subtle punch, for the punch bends inwards around the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents, then cleanse it by one of the openings, for the moisture is so short from one opening to another, and purifies.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then ask the patient's consent to let blood at your discretion, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and be careful not to probe too deeply, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the corrupted flesh and the rotten humors that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure should be continued until it is healed; and if the fistula is well opened in its proper place, you should fill it as full as possible with moist compresses in medicinal poultice, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then you put on plasters in a good manner to healthy flesh, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this means, then you should cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then you should cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerve does not grieve or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then you should clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things on healthy flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not cleansed, and returns to its previous state as before, know that you are not yet fully healed:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if you uncover and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus cleansed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep-rooted, so you cannot reach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to rely on nature alone;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can draw it out with pincers, then draw it out with an instrument suitable for that purpose, and if there are many bones, then draw them all out, leaving none of them;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture hinders you, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut and remove the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put a poultice on the wound that brings forth pus, and let it remain until the flesh is purulent around the bones, and then they will have more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a great bone, such as the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackened flesh is removed, then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is great part of the corrupted flesh and comes just to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	so it is necessary to scrape and cover all up to the corrosion, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came out at the leg and became inflamed with a great abscess, and he had no reason to stop until it opened;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the physician through their foolishness worked so much on the abscess that it opened, and there was a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and many ulcers came that all burst forth with pus and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many physicians had treated him for two years, and there was no benefit in the art of healing, until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the ulcers with great corruption.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the skin of the young person became red and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one was coming against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I hastened and cut into one of the ulcers until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came as far as the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to be the corrupted bone and thought there was no other corruption except for that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to heal the wound with medicines over a long time, and could not close it.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and was hesitant to close the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not until I covered about a palm of the bone with flesh, and made it whole to its entirety, then I healed it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to continue the treatment except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because of the blood evacuation, it often happened that he was cured entirely, and instead of the bone, a hard skin grew out, and he had good condition and no harm or contrary to anything at all, neither in going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be set like this:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a linen, and strain it to the top of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	et place another thread of linen larger than the first one, and tie it above the flesh that is below the bone, and let it be so that you remove the corrupt flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above the joint where you see fat, lest it injure the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a tison or a table beneath the bone in order to cover up the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to uncover and see as much of the corruption as one can see and feel, and uncover again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupt and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place a tison beneath, and then uncover from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure of the length of the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and be on the other side where it contains bone.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there being no other angle to cut from.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the toe, it is very strong that thing, but anyway you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and the sutures for cutting these bones are many, according to the structure of the bones and their appearance, size, subtlety, grandeur, smallness, and hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument according to the appearance of the work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and knows that the work will show you the instrument with which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think about the instrument with which you have need, according to what it is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder can be dislocated either from within or from without.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicine to correct this corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, then it is fitting to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes either by death or by the greater malice, which is more grievous, due to the failure of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the member becomes black, so it seems to be burned by fire, and afterwards it appears again, then this corruption of member spreads from member to member, and takes over the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten the cupping, and if it is due to the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the knee, then cup it, and do not give him space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, then cup at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, then cup to the shoulder;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the shoulder, it is a death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and so it does when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then cup after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then cup the whole foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the leg, then strike at the joint of the knee.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of striking or soothing the member is that you bind it above and below, stretching out one minister's line downward and another line upward, and you leave the flesh between the two lines to be cut one spatula width wide, until the bone is uncovered.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then strike or soothe, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the soothing does not touch the healthy part, and another lesion and abscess will ensue.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding comes from the wound when you work, then cauterize it quickly, or put some restraining powders on top.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it is sound.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to him at home in his bed:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a burn that seemed like fire-burning, and that corrosion came first to his heel of the foot, so it consumed all the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after that the corruption returned to the tip of his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him certain things that were reperfusing after the purification of the body, but he could not stop the corrupting;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of reperfusing the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted whether if he cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtues of the human body were weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he was desperate all over, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and he healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I did not tell this story except for the reason that one makes another tale when it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes to a swollen part and stays so long that it gathers a great collection of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they burst and pierce, and the pus jumps out, and the swollen part remains empty, just like empty vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is just as subtle as delicate draperies, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it comes to the bone almost by front, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is that you scrape away all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just as one scrapes away curtains;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and is not hurt because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have faith that the skin is hurt, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is full of flesh, then heal it with a poultice thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the breast is great, and the lump that is in it has a foul smell, then heal it with Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take oil of aloe, and oil, and litharge, equal parts, and put it to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take this mixture according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and make a poultice on the chest, and hold the perforation.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay for two hours, then strain it expecting;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breast is cleared, and the pus has been removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and at no time is it clisterized with ash water when this medicine is not present, and you should take ashes from the wood of the vine, pour water on them, then strain it, and apply it to the breast until you know that the breast is well cleared.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then apply water and honey or where he has a little bit of litharge mixed in.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	You mix honey with wine sweetened, that the honey has the property to purify and wash, and the wine makes the blood fresh.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are sure that the skin is well purified, then mix with what brings forth flesh in it, and take definitive poultice, made with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	You apply it with some medications and ointments, whose properties I have said or treat the ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the pustule of the skin is small, and the plug of the poultice cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with a needle, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or Basilican ointment until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, so that it cuts and leaves only enough space for the poultice to enter, and if the pustule that drains pus is above, then cut or lower it down to its level.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	Since the bowels are in harmony, do not let decay set in.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, then prepare in such a way that the bowels run to the lowest place they can reach; since the bowels are in harmony, do not let decay set in and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, then prepare in such a way.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bowels flow gently downwards, and do not leave anything behind from the bowels;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidative medications to put a seal on the wound, and place it on the linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the area with force in the wound, as it is no longer as wide as the first one; then anoint it gently with oil on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound of the breast to ease the bowels, and do not remove the great cloth elsewhere except after several days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is on the breast ulcer, often removes it to remove the boil, and knows what comes from the boil, whether it is venom or pus or enough or not digested or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that bursts forth on the breast ulcer, then know that the breast is already hardened, and approaching the state of health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, so change another dressing and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest ejects undigested bowels after many days, know that the chest is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, don't despair at all of one's health, for good health is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who take too long to clean their wounds with honey, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the undigested boil bursts forth from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not hardened;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	et if the skin is tardy in healing and is far away, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as ointment defines it, for there is great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take defined ointment and mix it with rose oil and equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then boil it and apply it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and make honey cooked and thickened, when defined ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then apply it to the cloth, and stretch it over the skin, and sometimes administer it to an Aristologist for a long time, and roots of lily, which is also like fine wheat flour and saffron;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simple or composite:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey I said, and use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is inflamed and is not healed by this remedy, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply and makes an impression on the bone, or hardens the limbs, or tightens the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the wound is a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the joint
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected and not attended to, then the abscess becomes gangrenous and runs and pours pus so long as it can run to the root of the nail, and by chance may even drain entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion all the way to the bone, so long as it brings stinky pain, and is the shoulder joint wide, and is the color flush.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the surplus flesh remaining from the boil, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleed, then it is necessary that you place the rod underneath the nail that pricks the flesh, and put it above, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicinal and corrosive substances in order to remove all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it away, and take out the pus, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, he cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the joint corrupting, then cut it away as was said before, and treat until he is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you should heal it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the gouty lump above with a diagonal cut, and be careful that the cut does not come all the way to the skin below the lump, for the patient would feel too great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The joints that occur in the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is a bone or it has bones, and occasionally one is born at the root of the joint, or birth is in some knuckles of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born in any part of the night from the shoulder does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the shoulder, by chance moves.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cut of one who is fat is light, in that way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born in the root of the joint is hard to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	it holds up from being cut.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or will be at the back part of the body, it is necessary that you scrape off first the fat around to the bone, then scrape the bone to a suitable thread for this, and then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The kind of wound that comes together by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cover this wound so that it can repair itself according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the skin is joined, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a wound comes to any of its joints with the palm, then bind that wound as it is necessary.
des vils	wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are great swelled and inflamed, full of melancholic excesses, which come from many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it occurs more in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you minister to him sometimes purging of gall, and then salve from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is where you cauterize, and wipe away the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you open a vein, and let it bleed completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The skin sores are according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	The first sign is a hot water swelling in the leg very strongly, until the gross blood becomes subtletized, then strain the patient's leg from above the hip down to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place or two places or three, with a wide incision, then lift and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure without harm.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and instruct him to eat flesh food allowing black bile.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommence the evacuation and purging when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies for this are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the patient's leg if it has many hairs, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and fill the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, then warm it by the fire, and then cut into the vein at the long part of the thigh or in the lower part below the knee.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then cut open the skin at the incision, and scrape away the vein from each side, until it appears as it should when one feels it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and then you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then bind the thread below, until it is raised from the skin, and then incline it to the incision lightly, and then cut in another place above three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape away the skin above the vein until it appears, and then lift it to the thread, just as you did, and incline it to another incision, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another size, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the joint of the foot, then train and lift just to the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then strain it from size to size, until it is all free, then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot strain and lift it, then put a needle on all the strong thread, and tie and train it, and put underneath the rail, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And guard that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then it cannot be strained or lifted, and harm comes to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have strained it all, then put a damp cloth of linen on the site of the wound in vinegar and oil rosated.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and curved together, and it is not straight, as we have said, so you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to open the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it opens the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of great curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is inserted into legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on the earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it may be found in another part than legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from beneath the skin, as it does inside the body of serpents and worms, inserted between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the skin changes, and the vein begins to flow forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth one and a half feet long up to two and a half feet, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it comes undone at the back, so wrap it around the cloth again, and tie.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, so cut a part off, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is entirely removed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, so it will enter into the flesh, and bring about an abscess and corruption in that place, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the top, and no part remain in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it often happens that this vein is treated up to ten or fifteen palms in length, and one man came to me whose was ten palms long, and when you cut it, so it bursts forth with a flow or a perforation, and pierces right through to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the matter inside be emptied, and bring to place medicines that have not been prepared for any day, then cure as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And at times to this vein many raindrops fall, and indeed when it opens in the joints of the foot or foot, and there comes out much pus, and then many raindrops;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	then cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Moors that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often afflicts oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes all around the body rising and falling, and the patient feels it well from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it is going, and jumps forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by purtification of some humors, such as come from worms and serpents and lumbri and ascarides or the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts of his evil because when it goes through the body and it climbs to the head and comes to the eye by chance it returns and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cure and pull out, one cannot avoid but when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tightly tied ligature, then cut on top and pull out what protrudes, and if the tip is embedded deeply in the flesh and you cannot remove it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming up to the head near the eye, then press down below it with a strong seal, then cut on top and pull out what protrudes;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient with a cleansing of the body by soluble medicines for bad humors brought on, and beware of eating foods that produce corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, I saw it rising also like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than anything, just as hot silver when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder, and then soon after it ran all over the body, until it came to the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that it was turning around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had wanted many things to move well from one place to another, but I did not want it, just as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins uncovered, and therefore that apparition appeared constrained;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear according to this reason to those who are plump, and who have moist bodies and veins responsive.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then cut on top until that constrained ventosity issues forth from the place.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it to your eyes, so treat it with the remedy of those who calm the vapors, such as stinking pills and viper's pill, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of theirs is that there are some who have great points, small ones, hairy ones, and roughened ones.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those who have two angles, and those who have tongues, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls in any member, if it falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in principal members such as head, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, warn you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not exactly out, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And when the brain sign appears when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the spinal cord that is above the brain is torn, it is when there is blindness and numbness and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of gall.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and possibly it is without force from the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and possibly it impairs speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaping from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and also jumping like a bruise of flesh.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, then take care of it and pull out the arrow if it's not stuck.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as well as the hair, and in cold black blood, and comes with shivering and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know without doubt that death is impending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that strikes the spleen is when without any foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient's color changes, and sighs deeply and searches for cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow hits in the covering of the liver, it is on the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and vomits great bile and great pain and sighs.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs of the shoulders are numb.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, by chance something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes the belly and bursts forth through the intestine route, there is no hope for recovery or in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow hits in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very painful.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and back of the neck and rib cage and hip and knees and legs, and a similar limb, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	An arrow fell at home on the threshold of the neighbor's garden.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I pulled it out and drew it under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And drew out an arrow that had fallen in the fat of the eye under the paper, and the arrow was bent back, and could only be retrieved as far as the point towards the fist, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, and very light without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The eye was healed, and no bad accident came to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I pulled out the barbs, and extracted it slowly as I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And draw out an arrow from the man whose was shot in the belly, thinking that he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after having passed 30 days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out further, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see the man to whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound is sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural dispositions did not change, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural activities.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And draw out an arrow from the king of the princes, who had been struck in his thigh, and was slightly declining to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and was the arrowhead fully covered.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was summoned to the treatment after she had fallen three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched for her in every subtle tent and did not find her.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a pricking and pain beneath his right earlobe.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the wound a plaster that is attractive and digestive, because the lump did not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the wound from the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on for many days and the wound healed above, and the patient remained that way for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead within his body one day.
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound medicine that is corrosive by many days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck in the joint.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I inserted into the opening of the wound by this medicine's aid, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and exceeded the terms by about four months, and then healed so well that I put in forceps and pulled apart and couldn't get out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to subtilize and ingeniously devise various methods of instruments, until on the first day I got well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as I was guiding it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctor judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was bound up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you set your care upon what I do not say, for books cannot take everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters know well to treat small things and what is present and failing, find nine remedies, and nine instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not emerge from members where they are stuck unless according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the way they enter, or by another place;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out far from where it enters is an arrow entering the fatty parts of the flesh, and sometimes this happens now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump out now, then let it stay until the fatty parts are gone around, and the exit is opened.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then let it stay like this for some days, and move each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps; and if it does not jump, so pierce around all the way to the subtle forest, until the surrounding bones are widened, and then treat.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the skull bone and goes just up to one of the bellies of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said occur to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if you do not extract it at all, but leave it until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the sacrum, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come just to the skull, and the patient remains some days without bad accident, then persuade him to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is stuck in this way and cannot come out further, then administer tarre around, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound is great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at which it is stuck, then remove the flesh that is stuck two parts away from where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as far as you can, until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, lest you pull it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the skin around it is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you disagree, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and think how you can pull out the arrow without danger, either soon or late, or firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot, then place him as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another side, or if it appears to be near him, or the skin is swollen in front where one can see or feel apparently.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut on up, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out.
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now and then re-start the extraction until it comes out finally.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is stuck inside him, soak his entire body in water;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrow breaks, and you have to administer binding, then administer the instrument shaved, so that the point of the arrow goes into the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push forward, and if the arrow is stuck, then insert the instrument with a pointed end into it to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you cut all around the flesh where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is stuck in the head or side or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it's nearby, you can cut on top of it, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and take care not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then pull out, and then cut the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one handles arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, moderate, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, in order to push forward at the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the forceps to push and to grasp if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one can bleed oneself, of which there are 16 on the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are located after the ears, which are called "herbeches";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appear;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspirations";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two sinewy things that are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and they are called "augerich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins by which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people commonly call it "the vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the median is called "femoral", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people commonly call it "the vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the spleen is situated in the right side of the belly, and the common people call it "the vein of the belly", and it is located above the kidneys, and it is that which is cured, which becomes manifestly apparent on the abdomen.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the wrist and the ankle, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is under the armpit of the left side, and the second saphenous one that is at the ankle of the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nerve" which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The cure of the veins that are after the ears helps ancient headaches and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of a healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and stroke the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then bind the patient's neck with a strap, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent folds from the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	and then at your discretion, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, so seize it;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and push it down through the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire vein above, and cut through the skin and the vein as much as the length of two fingers, and let out blood until you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then bind it tightly so that it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The wound of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migraines ancient and old, and sighted, and accustomed to ophthalmia, and in the course of hot tears to the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the surgeon are such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient stretches out his neck, so that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse below your thumb, and then signs with nodding;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the key on the vein above your thumb index, and push the lancet down, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and make the incision according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place a cloth on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The wound on the forehead vein is worth as much as the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraines, and in headaches;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is healed, and not once make a wide ligature.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it's not fitting that the flames be too strong;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the blood flows in a cross shape, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The juice of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and the acne, and the redness, and the yellowish coloration in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the qualities of their juice are such that the patient strains his neck by twisting from some kind of bond, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the blood, and let it be like the traverse, about a finger's breadth long, about a span wide, because there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make a compress of blood, as much as you need it, and then bind it with cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood of the vein of the night is worth as much to age, and also foreseen, and also diseases of face, so as emigraine and redness that comes on the face, and indeed when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the qualities of the blood are such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose to the left hand side, and takes the subtle flame long, and puts it in between the lip space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will start flowing now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not flow too much in front, and let the blood run according to your need, then bind it overnight, for it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the two groins helps to narrow down the swelling, and at the beginning of flux, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and sores;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the sickness is that the patient stretches his neck from under one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master is standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient sits on the stool, then opens the vein a little bit widely, then draws out blood temperately, or as long as it is necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then does the other side on the other vein, then loosens the ligament, and holds it steady in the middle, so that the patient does not choke.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leaves him until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of the veins above the lips is helpful for bleeding in the mouth, and for corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and around the neck.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	and the quality of the sickness is that you have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn your lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is to the right lip and the other to the left, and they are known by this that they are black, and because around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	cope then one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and do just the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding from the veins that are below the tongue helps greatly after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient takes a seat between your hands before the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks down at each side into one black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep in, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two manners:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	out of all fiery myrrh large, or olive subtle as cutting trenches, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the breadth and narrowing of veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the mirtin incision is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood apparent, and which contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive oil flame;
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the breast, and at the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to bind tightly and to beware of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a great deal of blood comes forth, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it must not be poking the flame, but cutting as with a shears.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open visibly, then you should extract it and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you take some of it away from him, or you let blood flow into his arm instead.
elle apert manifestement;	it opens visibly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut the flesh with a flame-like instrument, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you grasp the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with a ring and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a flame-like instrument;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	Fix the wound then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it flow upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your tourniquet on lengthwise, then remove it if the bleeding ceases, for this often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	If the arm breaks, and let it be so, and do not move the patient's arm;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be on guard, and do not move the patient until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood is not staunched, and it flows, and medicine is not present to you, then compress the artery if it opens, for the head of the vein retreat.
et estainche li sans.	and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a membrane of fig bark, and hollow it out, and take one half and tie it on well to the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the blood stops flowing, it's fine.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then if you treat it with the powders that stop the bleeding,
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of the bleeding is not guaranteed in many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein of the neck in a mixture so helps to treat blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, he will find the nerve, and it will swell and the bleeding will not cease, and by chance cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must tie the arteries with anestil.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and shield the nerve from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein of the cephalic side helps, which draws blood from the head and assists the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed when pricking the flappy part of the olive or mint vein, because this is the most saving of all veins, for there are no nerves nor arteries underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and do not trouble anything if it does not work the first time, and we start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance, some people's veins fill at the first attempt, but it does not trouble anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the pulse is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is not done except to preserve health, and to prevent illnesses from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are at the throat:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	To know, cephalic, swift, and basilica;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should be cleansed at the beginning of prayer hours in springtime and autumn after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should be cleansed on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The cleansing that is administered for diseases has no fixed time, but whenever it is needed in the morning or at night, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to cleanse children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant for less than seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not heal those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wants to cleanse themselves in whatever way, it is necessary that he reveals the intestines with a light enema, if they have many foul humors retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous substances harmful to the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	one does not heal well who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, until he has purged himself.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and one does not heal well after a violent passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequent staying with a woman, and travail, watching, and sleeping, and all that is contrary to virtue, or by something of war or of body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then adjust the humors, if the blood is thick, with meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter or take a bath, if nothing else prevents, to subtilize the blood, and heal from the wound around the third hour, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself that day from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be seated and joyful, and let the surgeon stand higher than he who is being treated, and rub the arm twice or three times, then loosen the tie above in a gentle manner, for when it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the joint with your hands until the veins swell, and one senses it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the surgeon's cloth with a small amount of old oil, then place the tip of his left hand on that vein below the joint, about a finger's breadth where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and fail from being pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee like strings from the surgeon, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the cloth on it, the cloth retires, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, then is the wound too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the physicians be informed about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein works the first time, that's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then one reopens it again a little below or above hastily if the swelling is not gone.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the swelling is gone and the patient is reassured, then one lets him stay for a day or two and does not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	in case abscesses will arise soon;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	nor does one enter water, then reopens the wound if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you see, then trust in that same opening to drain properly all the way.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and do the work with some haste, yet when the limbs are swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for it often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swollen, do not begin to bind it again, and apply a little bit of oil on top, for it lightens the body from blood, and is good for this limb as is the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each binding that you bind the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and the same is done with triangle and blue ointment, when it is applied to the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so that the blood flows and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a great abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not bound more than once or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and apply a wet sponge to the limb in warm water and silk for a little while.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if it stays at its place for some days with no blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on something with aloes or myrrh mixed with calaminth juice, poultice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there is abscess and swelling at the joint of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	put then your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, then that swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Be careful not to put anything on it of what we have said, for by chance the artery might be cut off.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make a plaster on it so as to harden the place, then apply another cure until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	If the blood is black, then let it flow out until it is red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, then let it be thinned out until it becomes subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, then let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, to make the wound wider and the flaps larger.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and make it heal little by little, and one should make it heal by cutting across, not by piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of healing saves from the loss of blood and the compression of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in apple juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is heated, treat him with blood three times or four; And if he has a cold complexion, treat him before the wound becomes wet and slimy in a sweet syrup, or in a scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and with well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he has palsy of the vein, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks a decoction of charcoal and subtle aromatic syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to flex his arm and be healed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to flex his arm after the first treatment, and he has a strong body, then he heals in about 7 hours after the first treatment, or around the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to be healed from another part, then he should be treated again on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body which is already heated, and it brings forth fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so that one must draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the aperture until it can be drained freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulses when he is healing, lest death come in place of healing, and this happens many times, when the healers are neglectful;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated and bleeding again, and the aperture is closed, that you press strongly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for it would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him leave it until he recovers the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you put the point of the flame to the tip of the vein until the blood that has frozen in the puncture flows forth, and put on a poultice of silk rewet in water, and press slightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, then let him bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is treated at the location of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the scab is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then be bound slightly, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through the center, not through the width or length.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and be the puncture wide, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, then do not put my hand into hot water, for one puts it in winter rather than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein of this wound is more saved from all other wounds, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein on the palm of the right hand is worth more than all other diseases of the liver, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand and put it in hot water, until the wound is drained, so that one may see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein goes awry, and you cut into it entirely, then nothing will hurt.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not cut too deeply into the bone, for the nerves are underneath all stripped of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the pus is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled out as much as is necessary, then put oil and gall on the vein to speed up the healing, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The wound on the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything in the same way as I told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the sophene is worth to all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of his urine are such that the patient pours some water into hot water, and rubs on the vein so long as it bleeds, and above the jointure of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins going;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then take out the largest vein, or the one at the ankle, which is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you take out the vein above the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cut across in a straight line as when cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the edges be even.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the needle fails the first time, then repeat the second at a spot above, because the flesh is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same to the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its wound is good against the pain of the backside when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his urine is such that the patient enters the bath and strains above the knee four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then allow the urine to flow in all ways you can, and crossing over.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth moving than cutting, for the wound is sound, and it is very red to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then let the urine flow from any part of him that opens, or from the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let so much blood flow as you see, and then loosen the bandage, and put on linen and tighten it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Wounds of cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Poultices are made from horns, or tin, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and wind-sweating is done according to two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this wind-sweating which is without wounding is done according to two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is done with full force, or without force;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and wind-sweating which is done by wounding and drawing blood is done in fourteen places of the body, where one is entirely on the top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in the two sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventoses under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventoses on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventoses above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the ventoses in both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the ventoses on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the poultices of two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the application of poultices does not concern blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore one should not weaken it too much, just as with bleeding from a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not suitable that she be administered, nor in any fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to necessity of diseases it is necessary to apply poultices, or for habituations, we should administer each one hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each season.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they have need to apply poultices, then have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are some who turn red with repletion and flush in their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness falls upon the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who spit out a drop of blood from their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and redden with blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who dream, and see through blood and hurt and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sap of the mummy so helps with the grevously wounded head... that comes to the eyes, and it does not seem right that this should be after the evacuation of all the body's blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this purging is in place of the sap of the cephalic, and it does not seem right that one who is of cold complexion or has catarrh should use it, for it causes them very great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it does not seem right that the elderly in use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from this often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the leech a little lower by the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The purging in the neck is in place of the sap of the head and of the brain, and therefore it is good for constriction of the stomach, and for rending the channel of the womb, and for all, and for fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	et it is necessary to force slowly, for if she holds too tightly, so one will encounter obstruction or indigestion or heart trouble.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The swellings on both sides of the neck are worth the pains in the head, and obturation and emigration, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is equal to the health of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you must instruct the surgeon to extend his hand when placing, not to cut the artery, and not to let blood flow excessively.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The swellings under the chin are worth mouth diseases and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is equal to the health of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The leechings on the shoulders are good for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The swellings on the sides are worth as much as three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the lord not to strike too deeply by fontanelle, for the bone is bare of flesh, and knows below nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids from the foundation, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large and made of earthenware, so it may well draw out.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if she were subtle, she would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it would make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses on the legs so plainly heal, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for ancient pains of kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and restore flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in place of the two shins and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring on paleness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of applying the poultice is that you put it on first empty, and then squeeze it temperately, and apply it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the red flesh appear and the blood well up.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then boldly, and replace the poultices, and take heed to the condition of bodies, for there are some who have dry flesh and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	it is necessary to wound once only, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one a little deep.
et suce legierement.	and squeeze lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to wound twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to thin out the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to wound a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to let out a little bit of blood little by little, if it suffices just once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, then we repeat the process often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, then pierce it deeply, and make sure that the veins are perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have tough skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the soles of the adhesive plasters with open and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in winter, with oil of wormwood, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamic oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one's skin is tender and has large pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather wash after the leeching with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain flower water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And that person who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive swellings drink old wine, or water of salsify, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or something similar;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not necessary to heal with a poultice before bathing or bathwater, but after the bath for one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and he does not sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be poultriced and when he is poultriced.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are sick choleric temperaments, and if their blood is too hot and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green grapes and endive and lettuce in abundance, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and tender meat, and flesh of capon, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, so take honey syrup and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and tender meat, and tender birds and small game.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and when he will gather himself, so must he drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the sweating, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the sweat be fine, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The poultices that are applied without hurting are those that are applied on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach and the bowels and the kidneys and the loins, for these members do not suffer being hurt there, and one only does so to draw blood from member to member, as we apply them on the breasts when the milk runs.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply poultices on the stomach and on the bowels to reduce the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and stays the pain when there is inflammation or stone; so stays by its attractive virtue the inflammation or separates the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the menses when there is retained windosity; and these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suckle only so much.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and at times they are administered together with fire, and at other times plain water, as in the diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water only, or with water that has been boiled with herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the poultice administered at fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two and a half palms of perfunctory depth, and have or coat the surrounding area around the mileu with a small pit, as if to insert an awl, and be of iron, so soft beforehand that it does not wound the patient when putting it on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and let it be with one hundred and twenty a beam of crossbow or iron, to put a candle in place, and there are many and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for children's poultices are different from old people's, and thin people's from fat people's.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus put this poultice on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the candle of wax or ointment, and put it in the middle of the poultice on the beam that is inside the poultice, so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice that it not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and let it be on the boil that we have said, so that when you want, if there is steam, remove the poultice.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the ointment just as before, and continue to reapply it often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass then which is administered to a patient with pleurisy, there is no stick nor pimple, and it is only brought out when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member as soon as.
et c’est li forme:	and that's the shape
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Cupping glasses are only brought out when used for members where it is not possible to put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare bones that are denuded of flesh, like the head or neck, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses that are in clear and pure water without any perturbation, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in cool water until they are familiarized, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be healed by vein and by poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clean and dry, and can be used to put a poultice, then one puts it there, because this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the limb by easy stages, and then by water, very well, and then tighten it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb heals too late after the application of poultices, then wet a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the poultice is congealed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the poultice is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is congealed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the limb half of peeled broad beans, and let them stay until they dry to the limb, so it will stop bleeding now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more assistance, take other surgeons.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the surgeons do not want to take it, then moisten the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the pus issues, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will set.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are flowing, then powder with a little alum and vermilion, or ashes, so they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and desiccation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish men throw themselves away from this chapter, for they have never seen anything in the old books nor read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason is estranged the science from our land, for I never found any good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing except by the science of ancient books, or that I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experience, and through the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and shortened it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are provided, as I have done in these two chapters previously.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and another; if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or infants, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is not too cold, or too hot;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and also cold cholera, that is to say, cold fits, and the flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with flesh which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about hot aposteme or expansion of matter in the member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient recovers to his previous good state which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a good nourishment, or he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and belly of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and rich wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with good nourishment, the muscles are restored more quickly and the break is healed sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well restored or joined according to their nature because of the decay of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but don't worry, reset on the broken bone with strong cords that bind and join the member together, until it is as strong as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and don't leave him without his work, and therefore he must be nourished with big meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a break of the head is another thing than a break of the breast or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that occur by twisting, and others by bending, such as the cutting of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with all a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for every way, let him have his own device, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory brings into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the break of the bone is by twisting, and it appears well by departure, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	et when there is no twistedness nor at the touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twistedness, or crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So you must not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then restrain it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage that occurs in arching, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them back together evenly, otherwise abscesses will come to life there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses hotly come there, then let it be left alone for a day, until the abscess is calmed down.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it equal to the movement that you can make lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then restrain it, as it is fitting hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, two parts long, whether it is arm or leg, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	et set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, then reset by all means the adductions in their places as far as you can, and take care that through your work does not come to the patient injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and set well the two bones of the skeleton according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel by hand if it seems to you that it is not well.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	so that it be set well, and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who bring about apostemic heat and contraction in the member through their work, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is set right, then chastise the patient so that they do not move it, nor in waking nor in sleeping, nor in turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the member be so secure that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	When he feels no pain, except perhaps at the tip, it is necessary to put him in such a state that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that he be set straight, so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is as I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is necessary to envelop him with soft and subtle linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is necessary to envelop him with a wide and strong linen, because the wide linens encircle all the large member evenly, so that there is no defect.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap it with light cloths, three turns or four according to the member, and hold your hand a little tight on all the linen, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break will move away a little from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften it gradually, little by little, until you take away a great part of the healthy flesh, then take hold of another ligament and turn around above the broken joint;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break and strain it moderately, not too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first lesson above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the ligaments strips of linen or cloths, until they are all even, then tie everything above with bandages, and then put your well-made straps on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, then put something calming and hot on it that removes the swelling, and let it be like that for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then strain over your straps and let them be of the middle of a well-seasoned ash stick, or of fir wood that makes clubs, or of palm tree saplings, and let them be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the break be a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as it is needed for the member of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then stretch it on the splints just like you did at the first joint, then tie above with a thread conveniently, just like at the first joint above the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is stretched up, the looser it should be down;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of fine linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bonds with cordage twisted in tortuous ways, and it's a great error, because the bond cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each splint less than two fingers' breadth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the points of the stakes after the straining in their own flesh, then put under them strips of linen or wool, so that he may not be hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will say the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not need to strain on all the members that are broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are great, it is not necessary to put splints more than after four days or seven, or more according to the security of abscess happening afterwards;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of plaster restoring breaks in various conditions, and indeed for women and little children, for it is not either too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take aloes, ladanum, unguent, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mix them in the proportion of ten to one.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mirror and aloe, five ounces;
alechil VIIII З.;	Aloe juice nine ounces;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into powder, and mix with the white of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if a man's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it quickly restores broken bones, and is worth to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is worth for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take muggite and muskavle, ten ounces;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mirror and aloe, nine ounces;
acaice VI З.;	Vinegar six ounces;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boiled Armenian ten ounces, and grind well, and mix with water or the white of an egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way of plaster for joints and bones that are out of their places, and relieves the pain happening, and they use it to shape the bone and the breaking:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new linen, and marinate it in vinegar and oil cooked, and place it on the sore.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of earthbound burdock, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to ease the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of Vismalve, Chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of poppy, each one a part.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and mix with wine, and apply it to the members that are inflamed, or if it's not inflamed, mix it with moist water of coriander, or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster even stronger than the first one, when abscessed flesh comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of Vismalve, and seeds of flax, Balaustie, Mellilot, and Sandwort, and flowers of violets and Chamomile, each one a part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush, and cook with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else besides, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to plaster that is good for wound and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take mallow and hawthorn of men's heads, or feathers of birds, and marshmallow, and equalize them, and crush, and make a plaster and lay it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not loosen it by main days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light linens, and moist sea sponge, and plunge it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it up with a nut, until you are certain of no hot abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and let the inflammation of the member rest, and may the pain be removed, then resume the subtle bandage, and apply a little ointment, and do not strain it as hard as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is gone and redness, pain, and swelling are all removed from it, and you need to use ointment and bandage again, then resume, as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not remove it until after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the splint is secure and approaches the union with the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and let the swelling of his meat increase, as I said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that pus cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then bring forth hot water mixed with vinegar, every time you loosen it, and let each third day pass, and slightly relax the ligature.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work, then cut off the pus from the member, and quickly do what foolish physicians do, who leave the member twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and it is poor work, and I see nothing else but to tire and toil correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various types of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of breakages and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are breakages that are caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes out all the bone just up to the shaft which is under the bone, as a hack or fist does.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and therefore this manner of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the sword pierces the bone above and senses it, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a stuck percussive blow, or a splitting or collar bone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persisting break that approaches just to the tendon which is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is opened in the bone is as subtle as a mouse, and it is a small crack, and therefore this breaking is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made or caused by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar, and causes the bone fragment to go down, and it is hollow like when blacksmiths heat metal on furnaces.
si entre li piere dedens.	if into the bone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more in those who have or whose head is moist like that of an infant;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and there occurs all these ways of breaking where small parts are dislodged as if they were.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak to him in his place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breakings by stripping away from them, and inquiring into tests, and through the corrupted flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of gall, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar things in more or less dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unendurable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounds come to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day if you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tendon below the bone will be corrupted, and the accidents we have said will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the break of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and take the chief of the injured patient, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if blood flows from the dismemberment, or an abscess forms, provide the aid that is needed, and then fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and be assured of the cessation of blood flow.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you bind at the constricting part before, and it's like this:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I put another cutting larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have many diverse constrictions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly, so that you don't cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and strong, then it's necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer constrictions with tweezers, not too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the testicle, and there should be above the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it's necessary for you to have many of them, so that each one comes to its place on the edge of the bone, so that you have tweezers for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of three types of parricides:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one parricide on the bone and turn to your two sides until you know the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then place the parricide elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertues, and make it more subtly than you can, and lightly, just as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, forceps;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is fitting that you take the apoplectin which remains of the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more sharp and more subtle than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it has none of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound of tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is more sound;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the oath very strong, and it is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears more clearly; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, which has this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side only, and the wound should be in two parts, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chip away the bone all around, and take great care not to touch the membrane that is below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for one removes it without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only on top, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape away the scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then use coarse scrapers first, and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-like cuts and subtle breakings, it is necessary that you bring about a cause according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is not replied to by one who has put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the boil is uncovered, it's necessary that you take a cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as lightly as you can, so that you don't irritate the boil, then administer above the other layer, and don't strain it more than is necessary to keep the wound simply.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be like this for one day or two, until the abscess is appeased, then loosen it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer thereafter medicines without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and wait until the wound is clean again, so you don't leave an ointment or let the bowels assemble above the brain's skin, for when the bowels gather above the brain's skin, they will run and burst forth, and the patient will suffer great harm.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you put a biting thing on the abscess, it necrotizes above it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the swelling does not come forth except through the medicine you have put on, and it has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix in one cloth, and apply it to the abscess.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue with the treatment by the means of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nail above are broken, or one alone by itself, for they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that part below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it becomes twisted or bent, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you plug your little nail or perforation of the nail with wax and put this breakage into your thumb's index finger, and then press firmly, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rod, rather large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do it the same way, and try to restore the first part as soon as you can, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	unless that, after seven or ten days, when the abscess is appeased, then plug at the top of the nail with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you push one apart from the other, if there is a break within.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and be so large that they fill the hollows of the night.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said some physicians that one must soak tents in butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be moistened in the making of a poultice with egg whites and mill powder;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the tent until the bone is hardened and the ligaments are toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes one uses owl's down instead of tents, and if there is a soft wrapping around it, and the dislocation holds fast, and blows the patient through.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears on the neck while you are working there, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of aquilione.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come forth, then apply an ointment by pouring out, with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg whites, and place it on light fires, and do not bind the night.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	et if the breaking of the nail is small and it is broken into little pieces, so one would lead it to suitable instruments for this, then mend the breakage, and cure things in the same manner as plasters and ointments are suitable for this;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nail, so one would treat it with tents, and put in plugs of pitch, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	(Note: This appears to be a title or heading, rather than a sentence to be translated)
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jawbone is out of place, and there is no wound to drain, and the break is only so slight that it is not actually broken in two, except perhaps inside, then one knows this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you bite your two fingers and place them in the mouth of the patient.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the breakage is on the left side of the jaw, so bite your two fingers of the right hand, and gently insert the breakage into them, and set it straight with the other hand by degrees.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone break is separated into two pieces, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of teeth causes a gap or a routure, so strain them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then put a waxed pad on the broken jawbone and place a double cloth over it.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite,
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, then release it on the third day, and then set it back to its original shape.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put plaster on top, with powder from the mill and a great deal of egg or fine wheat flour, after you have removed the gauze.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put a thin layer of plaster on top, and if the plaster dries, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, leave no fragment of the bone that has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if the removal is done with subtle instruments fitting for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then sew the wound shut, if it is wide, and put on top suitable poultices to promote flesh, until they are healed.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forceful blow breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where she is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is thus when there is no wound with the break, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken force.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches out the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the break evenly between your knees, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor hindrance.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round wooden or woolen staff, and make it thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stretch and lift the broken part, and strain the staff in your hand, so that you place the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele forward because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatrail, and put under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow, and have the assistants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the break to your knees, and if you find it fragmented, so it is necessary that you split it above.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and pull the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any adjustment, then cut at one of the dividers that you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but make sure to put this instrument underneath the forceps, in order to hold the screw:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and shape like a spoon, and not be chipped, and be as wide as it is needed, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two handles, as you see, and one be large, and the other be strong, just like the shape of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the breaking is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then use the wound dressing and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes forth, then moisten one cloth with rose oil, and oil of lily, and wine, and put it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The treatment of bone, when it is without wounds and without trimming, is that you put powder from the mill and egg white on the bone, and light stoppers above, and place a spear below the saddle, if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide band of one palm's width, then put the cloth doubled above the stoppers and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin band of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage are hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And put the band on the shoulder, and turn the bandage over the healthy side, and under the saddle sound, and under the saddle sick.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the shoulder well, and you clearly see that the band does not move on the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments relax, so restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient sit on his back, and place him while he sleeps with a small pillow underneath the armpit, to lift the aid in high.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	so that the strain on the shoulder strap is eased by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind unless bad accidents come, up to twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then restart the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and strain and leave it thus, until he is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and she is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and to some people in less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and it is not known to be inflamed except by the touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	so that you arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put powder of the mill on the joint with abundance of urine, and light bandages, and put it above the cloth doubled;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put a large and subtle needle above an cloth, a little bit larger than the shoulder, and under the needle are threads in some place of the shoulder, so bind those threads with linen bandages so that the needle stays even.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then bind it all with a great bandage firmly, so that the needle does not move from its place, and inspect the bond each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it swells, bind it again, and put the needle back in its place if it is out of its place, and place the patient on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, then loosen it, and be careful, for it is not the bone that puts itself back together lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is bent forward and points downwards at the joint, then straighten it up and the bone, and do what we have said about calming down an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the rib.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The weight is sometimes broken in mid-air, but this happens rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often enough.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in mid-air, then it falls downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and by chance may vomit blood, and exposes the tendons in the broken bone, and one knows well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and carefully makes sure they are equal in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then puts on poultices and plasters above the plate of salt or another light fabric, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it to the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turns the bandage around to the back, and holds it tightly, and rewards each hour with wine, and if it relapses, then he holds it tight.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to separate, because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the site, or pain or abscess, then hasten and separate, and scrape off the swelling, and address what has come forth in ways of treatment;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the swelling, and restrain it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs does not occur except in very large men after the back, and at the top inside, and it does not bend except because they are flabby.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he will feel it well during the examination that you must do.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedy is that you put equal pressure on the break, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply a poultice and bind with an iron band, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and pricking, just as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it leads to pricking, and all of them and vomiting great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous affliction, and the ancient ones have placed great cunning.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that fill the belly, in order to push the break backward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this except when abscesses hot and present arise, if they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then it is healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that you put poultices on the joint to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt whether the poultice attracts the superfluities to the joint due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to set equal the breathing around, then take care of the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which points to the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the joint of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the flesh.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone and draw it lightly, and then sew shut the two lips of the wound if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an abscess comes forth, then put damp cloths soaked in rose oil on it and apply them to the joint.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure while the place of it is suitable for an abscess, and be watchful on all sides where it should, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a break occurs at the vertebra of the neck, and then it bends.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor stretch them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortally ill in many dispositions, and if he moves and feels well when they are strained and pressed, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient is being cured, if one applies care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take heed if the feet are soft, and if there are accidents in hand, and on the back sudden windiness and evacuation without will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has cured it on his belly, then evacuation occurs without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is overcome on his back and wants to settle down, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor much in his healing.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the remedy is that you apply oil of rose or oil of egg yolk on the spine if there is a hot abscess, so long as it is appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then place one of the soothing and drying poultices on it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover the wound with a splint;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, and then treat it with ointment applying flesh until he is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", then put your pouch in your left hand and place it equal to your other hand at your power, then put the poultice and needle on, if you need them;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then pull it, and if there is a broken bone, do the same thing on it, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the hip bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	When the hip bone is broken, and if it is, then there is a slight diminishment to the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and becomes longer, and declines at the pelvis, and comes to the patient with pain in the place, and punctures, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, as far as you are above the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and knows what kind of break it is and its shape is.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only in the head, then set that break even, so that it be in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, so lie down the patient on their stomach until the restoration of that break is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it even, then put on the plaster, and then put on a wooden or horn splint, and restrain the break, so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the place below the ribs, until the ligaments are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their right side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscesses form there, do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and apply what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and that's the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder break
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The adjutories are those things that are between the shoulder's top and its head, and if they are broken, one must restore them according to one of the two manners:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a fist-sized piece from the main growth, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two heads with two strings, and pull them up high, and make the patient sit on a siege;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then let it go with the broken arm on the fist, until it comes to the joint, and has about half a cubit of fist, then pull up on something heavy or have the minister extend it down.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the mirror's edge equal to his hands together, so that the edge returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hat or headrest, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two attendants, one to hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other to hold below at each string, and stretch each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, so hold the ligament below the breastplate, and above the breastplate, and extend each of the assistants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the edge is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you place one end under the armpit, and the other at the back, under the edge.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the edge is at the back, then it is necessary to place one end slightly, without effort, so that the edge is equal above and below.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the edge equally as it should, and hold it, lest abscesses come to be there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses come to be there, do not hold it at all until seven days, and apply a warm poultice of linen and oil of roses, so that the abscesses are pacified.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then the restraint is, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the emplaster on the shoulder blade, then set the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put a cloth, and restrain it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not broken, use stakes, and place a stake larger and stronger than the others on the shoulder blade, with two spaces between each stake, and have each stake be as long as it passes three palms on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then strain on the stakes, in the manner I said at the beginning of this chapter on the shoulder blade, stronger and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the seating of the stars and the stretching, as we have said, in the cure that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it alone until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then look at each one after three days to see if the swelling or inflammation does not increase and come back to its place, or if the numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you bind it, as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident comes, then do not release the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a layer of equal thickness of clean linen underneath the support, and look at each hour of the day or night to see if the shape of the broken member does not change, or if the bandage is loosening.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If he is addressed through the power of medicine, and gives him food that we have placed before him, in such a manner that the food be for the first subtle ones;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, if it is thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is custom that the assistant and the leg should be set back in forty days from then;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must loosen it and administer bath and ointment remedies to direct the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and bound, so it must be untied in one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus", one of which is small and is that which supports the socket;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is that which is below, towards the small toe;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, one breaks only the great humerus, or the little one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the great ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is a small bone that is broken alone, then it must be slightly extended and set even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a great bone, then it must be drawn out with greater force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it above the cushion, and hold the patient's hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others' bones, and let the patient cross over himself, with the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then stretch one of the ministers' arms to the part under his hand or to the joint, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the mirror equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that are loose and cannot be held by force, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and use an osteum, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if there is wound with bruising, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	Take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if abscesses appear in the beginning of the restoration, take a poultice made from rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the poultice gently above, until the abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the poultice, and put an ointment made from flour powder mixed with a great deal of egg, then apply the candles, and let the candle on the edge be stronger and a little bit wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six candles or arms in multiple positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	or whether the burn is on one of the bones or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold it more above the burn than elsewhere, and always less away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are on the dressing soft and moist, and not hard or dry.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and be the thread, from which it is strained, of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you wash the member with hot water, until those itchings are appeased.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not too tightly rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the joint is relaxed and the bones are loosened, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit and leave it thus for some days until the swelling comes, and then bind.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or around it, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this dressing is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the bruise of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that behind the hand and in the fingers many bruises occur, and there is no other way than to bend them many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plantar aspect of the hand is broken or bent, it behooves the patient to cross his legs and sit straightly before him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then places his hand on the spread cloth and stretches out the broken bones, making them equal with the splints, until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and applies the poultice and bandages, unless an abscess comes, then he puts in a stake according to the quantity of the swelling.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth with a Y-fold.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is around the ankle joint of the foot, make a bundle of cloths and instruct the patient to wrap it tightly around his broken foot.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then strain it with a long cloth, and make the stake as thick as the plantar aspect of the hand, and strain it, as is fitting.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the bruise is on the outside, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another one underneath in the hand, so that the fingers be open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of us from below, so it is a pouching, then set it even, as it should be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and strain with the sole, and if you see that putting a small straight stick will lift the fracture, and it does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is at other joints, such as in the index or one of the others, then set it even and bind it with a bandage that is behind;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all together in one holding, as much as it is worth, or put on a splint like a pouched one;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take heed in the restoration and setting of a hot abscess, and secure what comes out, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken shin
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns in front and behind;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is such that one ties above the breakage, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face, then stretches each attendant to their equal share.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the breakage is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the tailbone, so that one of the ligaments points towards the fingernail, and the other ligaments are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the straps be below the knee and the stretching be down.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the splints on the bone equal to his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then put the poultice, and the bandage, lest abscesses come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it settle then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is done in the same way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap above the breakage with bandages doubled in two or three places, and remove any superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the toes come to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee on the underside, and let the end of the thread come up.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn up on the leg and on the knee the bandage, then put on the breeching stays, and put one stay on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then employ the leather strap between the leg and the knee of soft cloth to put equal tension, then begin to bind strongly three or four turns on the breeching.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further up on the breeching, and loosen it less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and the knee, and tie three stays that are above, then return to the lower part at the head of the thread, until you come down below the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until no swelling or abscess or other similar thing occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if there is something wrong, then dislodge it, and address what comes next, just as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that are pricking, then it is necessary to remove them if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut through the flesh and pull forth;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the cup of the shoulder is broken thus one puts in stones as in the apothecary and on the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	nevertheless, in the restoration done thus the patient does not get better.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the shin is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the diversities of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the swelling of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Knows that in the bend of the knee there is slight breaking, but it folds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's not more than a crack or a pore, and it occurs in every wound, and without a wound, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when one puts back what is bent to its joints, as long as it can be moved.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then put the poultice on, and place a rounded stone if you need to, and bind it as is necessary, then reward all the preparations that we have said for other breakages, such as an abscess and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he sets to each accident what is due to him, so long as he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, for which one is called by its right name "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it happens with all sorts of breakage as it comes to the arm, and for that reason is the restoration such as that of the arm equally, and the works are all done. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns wrong in every way.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the big bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well;
et torne desoz.	and turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply an extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but always, it is necessary if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be smaller and more gentle;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and bind according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed all your work, take two straps of ash-colored wood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the kneecap down.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two layers of cloth above and below, and bind it securely in the middle as well, so that at this point the leg cannot bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should minister to the bones of the long length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break or where there is injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cures as long as he is sound.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and two or three pieces, and in most cases it does not exceed more than four dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has a break in the bone of his foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, where the bones are lifted up, and press it until they return to their place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the poultice and bandages on top, and under the foot of the foot a small piece of cloth to two full shoes, then strain the foot gradually, after you have wrapped around cloths and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if he has any of his toes broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put an splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly larger, then put that piece of cloth I mentioned under the foot, and strain it gradually.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, break them; and place a stake on each one according to its size, wrapped in one fold of linen, and tie the table beneath the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be so that on top of the stake is the opening of the table to go into the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, since we have spoken;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bones of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of natural womanhood is broken, make her sit with an enlarged pelvis, then incline her towards the back part, and let it be held by the rear.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the natural opening of the patient with cotton, and put in as much as the stomach is.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then push away the woman, and lift the small of the back piece by piece, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and return the bone with its stop.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, then remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or around.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	and then the break will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie it to the penis with a cord, and pour all the bladder into nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the cord strongly, until the bladder is emptied inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the nature will return to the break.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the finger of man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hare.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use there and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break signifies the right path of restoration in many dispositions.
enten le donques.	then understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the splint, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the splint;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for three days or eight around, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with an open wound, whether it be large like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to heal now, as the wounds that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing, but then becomes infected with vinegar, and you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, lest abscesses form and do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then leave the restoration alone for nine days, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the surface of the skin, it is necessary that you place it in slight extension with your hands.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not ready to put equal with your hands, then reattach it with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them, according to what he needs in each treatment of a break.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and somewhat big, that it does not bend at all to the compression on the member in your work, and be arched forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on top of the apparent head of the bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and tie it once, until it recovers, and let it be even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the top of the bone, until the instruments have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we said, then use a suitable instrument to this end, or chisel or gouge, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then gather up what remains in the bone of roughness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	So do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in black medicinal wine, and properly clean what remains.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put any cerate or other substance on the wound where there is oil, unless you make it bring purification and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and let the wound be uncovered, and cover the surrounding area entirely, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, and they have brought upon the patient or death or corruption sometimes;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and be the stitches more soft and gentler than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil consequences may come from it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put ointments on.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, instead of ointments, hard cloths and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the bow to the wound, so take away what you put on top with all wine, and put in healing ointment for wounds, just as four-leafed ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you stretch the member two times a day, morning and evening, until it is fixed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are aligned in such a way that the bow string runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens that way for several days, and it cannot heal but instead swells again, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these disjointed pieces that bring forth that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, so it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is written in its chapter before this.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and appears on top of the member, just like the bones of the hip or shoulder, and other similar ones from the large members, do not pull it, for many times death ensues, but let it stay until it can be fixed.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance it will fall out after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often see after the breaking of bones, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a sad thing to behold the figure of the member.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if our nail is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if the administrator administers stiptic medicines, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, then take one of these things or all together, and mix it with wine, stiptic vinegar, or with an abundance of egg whites, or with oil.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and places it on the nightstand in bed, and holds it tight, and does not remove it for three days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then unbinds it, and starts another one, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you bind on a well-made linen bandage;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the linen is that it removes all swellings from above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling has already become hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut on top, and make the excess apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you put it in someone's hands until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the break in the bone is restored, and remains after the weak and subtle limbs, since it happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or because of abundance of swelling;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, not at its own time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make their body soft, until the blood is multiplied in them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer bath, and give it joy and ease;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put pitch on the member, so that the pitch attracts to the great swelling, and draws out often with water till the swelling goes into the member;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken apart, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	so do not believe the foolish people who say that one should break the member all over again, and many foolish physicians have done so in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and brings great evils, and by chance death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary that they be applied with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as plantain leaves, roots, and mullein, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the plaster should be made soothing, such as diachylon well made, and you take the poultice of plantain, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	You take greasy figs, and crush them with henbane, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And at any time remove the swelling by continuous and lengthy rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there should be a gentle movement to each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the swelling is hardened and calcified, like stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, so you must cut just up to the bone, with a fine, subtle incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put sense and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, so it is necessary now to bring it back into place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance, if one puts pressure on the swelling.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	therefore it is not fitting to move him until he has deflated.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times brings on spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	nevertheless, when this happens, if it makes the patient better, then leave him, until the abscess is pacified.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then wet the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	The jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are slightly pulled out of their places, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the breast, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps around its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through many gentle procedures.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and not hesitate at all;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts the mirror's speculum into one of his hands in the root of the jawbone dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is into two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands be free to make it even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jawbone, and move it from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers put it back in place, until it returns to its natural position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is stiffened, even if both jawbones together are stuck, so raise them with hot water and oil, until they become slightly loose.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not neglect the setting back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are set back evenly, and the patient's mouth feels well-mollified, so put on moist cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with moist bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on his back, and his legs being between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he strain himself at all, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are freed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat as he likes lightly, and do not trouble to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their natural state, then fevers and sore habits ensue, and possibly also bowel looseness, and possibly also vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a misfortune;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the person who has it will die within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the chest within its continuity and from the breastbone, and is dislocated sometimes to the back, and it is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the joint strongly onto your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the poultice and the bandage, and tighten it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder that is near the cut cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it does dislocate once, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the poultice and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus also bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is when it dislocates at the base of the neck below.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the breast;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and many times it dislocates downward toward the neck, especially in those who have little flesh, for they jump forth hastily;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Those who have enough fat, jump away from stones, and return to stones.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary then that you try it out, until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocation occurs when it falls downward towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the shoulder blade touching the top of the shoulder, just as if it were an ox.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their neck, nor move at all with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touching point.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation is not for anything but to bring back when it is new or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the servant lifts the patient's hand high up, then places the straps underneath the armpit, and lifts the joint upwards with force to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the servant lifts the hand and stretches it high up, then places it underneath.
si venra hastanment.	so it will come to be quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it doesn't come as we said in three days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the amnestor should moisten and soothe it, as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and bring it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then cover the patient with a blanket on their back, and put underneath the armpit a layer of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then place the fingers of the patient's hand; lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other attendants hold the patient's head so he does not move down;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder comes back to its place now, and if you see that you are repositioning it in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you make someone larger than the patient be present;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it should be straight towards the patient's side, and push the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift up the armpit so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another attendant pulls the patient's hand down towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can hold with him something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And reposition it in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and that's when you put a long poker in the ground, whose head is as steady as a piston, and not too big or too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be put under the patient, but so that it has wrapped itself softly above, and the patient is leaning on the long piece of wood;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then her hand will be extended below on the other side forming, and the jointure will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, so do this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a piece of iron, two hands long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so that it may enter deeply under the shoulder blade, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie it above the head of the fist wrapped so that the fist does not hurt the patient, then place it under the shoulder blade of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend your arm above the fist of length, and tie the aid above the fist, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on top of one shoulder blade of width, and let the hands go down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint comes together now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is returned, in whatever way that may be, then it is necessary that you put below the socket a ball of wool evenly, then apply the poultice around with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all the shoulder and around, then strain below the socket gently, and turn the cloth on the poultice, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he be patient a little while until the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then be patient again after three days or seven, and move him;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if he is stiff and has not been softened, it is sound.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three places, as is written before this chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this and he slips after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is torn or stretched or loosened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the chest, or shoulders, or back, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and another instrument is administered.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal so long as he is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take many baths until that swelling is alleviated and the member returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated to points, and to points it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it has dislocated in all parts, and even before and behind, and the dislocation is not set right, for one can see it well and feel it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person's shoulder with the skin, so you can see it plainly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as the swelling comes to life, for if the swelling came to life, it would be hard to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be completely set right, even when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes greater pain, and by chance many die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you stretch his hand with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above, and below, and bind the joint to his buttocks together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes it to the root of the palm onto the shoulder that is out of place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong stretching;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm and hold it firmly, so that it does not move with the stretching;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm on each side, then having wrapped a double fold long and wide around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the nurse has bound the joint to her hand, she anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then binds the joint firmly, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, then applies dry powder with some egg white, and binds it firmly, and bends the arm to the patient's neck, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the ligament and let it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not bind well, then reapply the poultice and the ligament, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels stiffness after the realignment of the joint, and it becomes swollen, then bathe it well and massage it gently, and press until it is relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you put a layer of fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, then massage the joint temperately, then put the wool back on, and then enter into water.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus two or three times, until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, put a cloth soaked in warm cow's milk with butter on top;
si revenra a sa disposition.	so it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joints of the hand are dislocated, and the swelling is light, more so than in other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it is dislocated, as long as the swelling is hot or an abscess comes forth.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedy is that you put the ailing hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of your hand, and place the palm of your hand so that it meets the appearance of the jointure, and press down until it recovers.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary for you to check if it is well in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the patient's hand on a table at the extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back on their hand on the table, and the doctor puts their hand on that appearance of the jointure.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If she returns now, it's well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	Unless, if the strain of soothing ointments calms abscesses thus, and it is left in this way without recommencing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and nothing harms the patient except until the hand is softened, and cannot strain anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to strain through burning by case, and it may not be worth anything by chance.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then displace and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, apply warm water to it, and rub it until it is sound.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the tendons of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or stomach;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then the tendon is set and push the dislocation into your pockets as much as it retracts, then support the head of the tendon and draw it towards the part where it is detached;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, then set it even on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and tie the nut with what we said, and loosen the joint of a day, and make it move, and re-tie the nut;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often until it is straight, and also do so if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it just as you did before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do this when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	and treatment of the hump on the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the hump on the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without one's will, nor can they be held, and many times a certain member, or both breasts, or two arms, or one is softened.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shin bone moves into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	the one that moves in back is called "gilbositez";
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the cure is that you reward if the goutiness has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there isn't any cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the old ways of curing say great things through big words, but there is little profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the goutiness that comes before the stomach, there is no remedy nor health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straightly in both sides, and one cannot cure fevers except for that which comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in one equal place and have some strain under him, so he does not get hurt;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then drive the iron spike into the ground firmly, and another to the feet, and bind a cord between the straps of the patient, and another to the thighs, and knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two assistants know the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron spikes.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the spike as we have said, and the physicians put their palms on the spine firmly, until it relents.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not relent with this treatment, take a board three arm-lengths long, and hollow out the bottom of it, and the patient lies on his side, and push the top of the board under the back, then place the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and the physicians put their feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it relents to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, make him do it to the one who turns at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	and you make two blisters on the head of the patient's great arm, and towards the feet two others, with a hand's breadth between each blister, one above the other.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each blister one pore, where the worm runs through, and let the blisters be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two blisters be one blister turning, on which the worms turn, and have in the two turnings two small blisters a hand's breadth long, to turn the worm;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the cord that is between the knots to the worm going towards the head, and the other cord to the other knot at the foot, and each of the servants turns his worm along the entire cord, and the master makes it even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Et quant elle est igalz, so put on desiccating plaster with abundance of egg white, and then bind, and then apply an ointment from a tablet of three inches long that procures the place of gibbosity and the part of the spine to be whole, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient, until he is well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes to the end of the health, it is necessary to administer soothing and easing medications, with the ointment that we have said above.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes one administers a piece of linseed, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and that is the bone which opens, why one should not have presumption about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance would death come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come forth except with dislocations alone, nor does it come so with other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	within and without, and before and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and further within than that, and pulled dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the diseased leg to the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee sticks out more than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot double their knee in fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the leg that is under swollen apostemal heat, because the head of the groin comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens on the outside is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	The signs of one who has this condition before him are that he is well proportioned in his leg according to completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Everywhere, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he goes, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in back is that he cannot spread his kneecap, nor double it, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and is the head of the hip at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you should treat if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its condition, and there is no care.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not necessary that he have presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, then hasten to return the joint, and stretch inside and outside, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	by chance if it will return, and there is no need for another care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you appear the minister strong, and strengthen the leg by two hands, or by one ligament that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft ligament above the hip.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another pulls the end of the ligament.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch it up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, just as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then it is necessary to make an incision according to its likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the hip-joint, then it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligament above the root of the hip, and the end which is below the angle, then stretch the ligament upwards towards the angle, and towards the femur.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another assistants' arms, and embrace the thick part of the ailing person's hip, and stretch it forward firmly:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	so it will return to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the patient together with a soft strap on the two heels and on the two knees, and let the sick leg be stretched two doits more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it should be suspended from the top of a beam, and be above the ground two arms long;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the assistant to embrace the head of the hip, and have another assistant holding with the patient, who should hold firmly the hip, because the joints are returning quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the back, then lie down the patient, just as we have said in the case of gilboesitey, and stretch out the cloth above the afflicted leg properly, and also above the pelvis.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two spits, one at the head and the other at the hips, then insert the spit between the patient's thighs in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have damp cloths wrapped around, so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch each attendant towards him, and place the mirror next to his hand on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on the table, and press it thus as we have said in gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, then it is necessary to extend the afflicted leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the mirror so that it is on top of the afflicted knee, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the kneecap.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not need to stretch out the patient downwards or lift them up towards the earth, but rather should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on their face, and the strap should be stretched as we have said before, and must not press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be in place when the patient stretches out their legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the hips, and apply the poultice, and strain it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and if he rests for three days or four, then loosen it, and apply the poultice on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are equal, then strain it again, as before, and leave it for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then loosen it, and let it go gently, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The joints are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inwardly and outwardly, and backward.
et ne desalue point devant.	and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their hip, and if it does not bend at the hip, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit up straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and place their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take their kneecap between your palms, and draw it inwards between your two arms, then bend the two sides of the kneecap sharply.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister stretches their foot until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends slightly at the hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put on the poultice, and make the leg rest at the hip, and tie it together tightly for three days or four, then loosen it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not bother the patient to walk until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, strong extension should be administered, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tend before the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the return is lighter, and one should stretch it lightly with his hands when he is only slightly stretched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated entirely, then you should make the patient sit upright, and hold him tight with one minister only by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot to you at your right hand, and then to your left two times, then stretch it upwards, and pull the foot well up;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it's well;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	but if not, then start the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it can't return like that, make the patient sit on the ground with their back to the earth, and place one leg firmly on the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around so the patient doesn't hurt;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then take hold of the leg, and another attendant should stretch out the foot to their hands or to the binding strap that ties around the ankle;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each attendant should stretch equally, and the straps should be there between the patient's thighs to hold the patient in place when one is stretching;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put the fingers equally on the dislocation at their hands, and another attendant should take hold of the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is fixed in place, then put the poultice and bandages on top, and bind firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so that the ligament is not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligament swells, then bind.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then release it on the fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess bursts forth, it is necessary to lance it, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, you should gently stretch them without effort, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or heel of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a plain floor or on a level table exactly straight, and place your foot on what appears to be this joint, then press firmly with your foot until it is restored.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is equal and there is nothing appearing, so put a two-legged table under the sole of the foot, then strain them strongly, and leave it for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not modest in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and tardy, nor too bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and start with gentle soothing things on the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscess may come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is at rest, administer soothing things to abscesses hot, and treat the wound as it should be, with ointments dried.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a breakage with dislocation, and small bones separated, set them and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this brings harm according to your Creator, and for the strength of your arm and body.
