O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and there remains nothing more of it except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is set aside.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will gather together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from each other, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and resting of veins, and the issue from them.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the non is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he fall into error and harm men; thus I have wanted many times more than those who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Here is the translation:
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another marvel that treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of his bladder, and the man died within 22 hours.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the trainer, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if one touched it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another marvel that took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the marvels, plain from ignorance, held the break steady over the wound as it was by strong binding, and did not leave the wound any salve, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be undone; and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I released it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But throughout the journey the corruption was already confirmed in a limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was almost lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And you see another case that bursts an abscess inward, and then becomes inflamed due to the evil of its dominion.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into three divisions: namely, avoiding where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to take care of yourselves, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in custody, and take hold of your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised; and leave behind the grievous diseases of sorrowful sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish people."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into 12 chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicinal cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments, and the iron of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest words and subtle science and secret responses; and from this speak many wise men, and agree with this; and I suffer little from their words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery aids universally for every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions lack matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, they assembled matter, some devised that fire cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not effective for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot illnesses by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite, that fire cautery makes great aid for hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body frozen.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it's not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by transmitting, and cause the member to come to grievous illnesses through bad sanitation; and thus the patient is often injured.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire is not for its height and for the goodness of its substance, it does not do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I would reveal the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it debuts the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree at the time when they are doing the cauterizations, and they choose prompt ones.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries that occur are easily treated by the help of cauterization; and also the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasten them so that greater harm does not come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think of anything, dear son, as fools gaze; for the disease that is healthy due to cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that alters the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine by the speed of its value, and by the virtue of its work and its dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease returns several times according to the complexion of the patient and the virtue of the disease and its dominion; and they are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of vices and similar things, so it is not cauteries administered in place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density against pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return at all; but it happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish gazers.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than iron, and did not say that those fires were because of the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance; and said that the uses of cautery do not make putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than iron, as they told us.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much; they make at the fire; and thus there is enough of an obstacle.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cautery that we have made appear more suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter of the main things just below, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	for the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of songs and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and meanwhile all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine modifying the head, either three or four times, according to whether the strength and age and habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make the head of the patient ready.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of your feet; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign of ink on the affected area, and make a gentle incision and extracting with your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand slowly, and examine the area if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little of silk, and put it in a soft and wet cotton cloth, and place it on the affected area, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on a moist poultice; and leave it on until the swelling is gone; afterwards treat the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And so said the old ones, that the more one delays in opening the wound, the more it festers; and for this reason, it is of no help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that one detaches a piece of bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (because the humors issue forth badly); and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and solder it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two types of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvific and milder for me, and thus I often use it in assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, one should use the remedies of yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of applying plaster; and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize beneath that cautery a little that we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After fire cautery on the corner of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do the cautery where it is called "vasselez"; and it is put in a place where one applies ventouses; and lift your hand so you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those on which one performs cautery on the softness of the head, and that's the method.
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged by Mondifian medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are made, and none of these profit: then you do cauteries according to the methods, namely medicine against ague and fever.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine against ague are that you take a dose of alum, and remove the scab and recover the affected part of the head, and then make a temple where the pain holds in some manner so that you can apply the dose of alum under the skin; and when it is applied, bind it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then unbind it and treat further with the dose of oil, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put a poultice on the affected part in a wrapping cloth so that it can be inserted.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of burning, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that I have written about certain burning medicines or twelve treatments of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery to the shape it is in:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a key or it has .i. little curvature, and in the middle of a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the thickness of the skin be heated; and lift your hand so that the artery does not become hardened, which is defective, and decorates abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the seat of the wound, and placing it on the spot for two hours; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then treat the spot of burning as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to block the artery in this emigraine which is not yet old.
de emigraine	from migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned before in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and mark also on the painful spot a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold steady so you do not touch the artery and do not reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the decormentation of blood from the artery when it is touched, where there is great fear and dismay in him who does not know, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the vein in the middle path; but I will tell you how one restores blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the spot where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. Coutelz; and these cauteries are better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain caused by cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After making a point around the sick ear, or around the eyes if the pain holds in both, and you remove a little from the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the wound; and there are ten points around each ear; after healing the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment that must be healed by cautery is not just from those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses; and do not make a point of cautery on similarities that come from numbness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture that moves with flows of tears and evacuations of the head and gurgling, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the top of the ear above a little from the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery so long as the middle of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cautery that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cauteries be a little larger; after healing the wound as I have said before, so long as it becomes healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: one on the horns of the head, one in the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of the sluggishness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient big and round mondifiants pills for the brain; after that, place on the back of the head the plaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus insane, it is good; and if he is not, do three cauteries on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cautery of two fingers' width; and cure as for others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, do a cautery in the middle; and if the mastery is, do others on the horns, and cure until he is sane; and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be done as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified of years and of what we have said before; after resetting the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery in the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is fierce, make three fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is reached, and lift your hand; after curing so that it becomes healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics must not use fire cauteries except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers greatly from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, make a gargling and mastication purifying the brain frequently with good meat; after resetting the head in the middle, and I make one fire cautery according to what we have said before, and one fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is fierce and suffering, make fire cauteries as I said for those who have paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and may the "olivier" fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is weak, then have them undergo subtle fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross humors, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for one who is paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining excessive humors into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clarify their brain, according to what is written in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After resetting the patient's head; after make a well-made torc of linen, also like a circle, if you put it on their head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly in all parts; after apply the liniment, and take care not to burn with old bitter berries; and heat it with tempered fire, so that they do not suffer from the poultice; after remove the circle from within their head, and let it cool down; and do this for the patient every week once with another good government, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you apply the fire cautery, make points all over the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then put on cotton wool in a pimple and in fat of a hen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the juice of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the juice comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have told in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to restore his head, and make him apply a cautery in the head, and make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the juice is from the .ij. eyes together, or in one eye if the descent is in one; and cover all the cauteries with all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the disorder of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a little powder as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will hold it steady; and no one has ever made a cautery or burned beneath the two last ribs.
dou cors des larmes	in the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear in the forehead defects; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold flatulent humors, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the treatment descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burned beneath the .ij. bones; and if it needs more, if you cauterize strongly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	in the course of tears from beneath the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three evil humors; afterwards, raise the head, and apply fire cautery or mild olive oil cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the three sorcis, a little beneath the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive". Because this is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that three cauteries are applied on the three sorcis as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into thorns, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and they are even, then put the patient in their healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if it were the flower of a dead tree, and it is the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton wool in the glaire of an egg and musk oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery in the form of which it is.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same spot, as you did previously; and if the hairs are burnt, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical cauterizers are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and lively charcoal, one half ounce of each, and mix well together; and apply hastily, so it does not get cold, then spread on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, one must operate on one, and if both alike; and put underneath the eye a soft cotton soaked in water; and the head of the patient should be in good health and show your finger pointing to the medicine, and press a little and move all the times that the patient feels biting sensation from the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the biting sensation has passed, lift the skin of the eye, and see if you see the skin lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine did not take effect, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put soft cotton soaked in water in a poultice, as long as the bitter humors are expelled, after curing the eye of the affliction which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if it's necessary that you take great care of your work through careful attention so that not a single point of the medicine is missed by the eyes.  And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on the spot where the skin is softened properly, just as you have done before; after the treatment until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of the mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adapt your constructions accordingly; and do not miss the right way for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Here is the translation:
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is opened, and in drawing out the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so the eye, and draw four fingers to the bow; after put on the hot cautery cauterizing strongly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail beneath the eye, so that your hands do not cause folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then recommence the cautery once again, and another time you have mastery over it, and leave it two days; after I put on a cotton pad moistened in borax, and the cure of the ointment desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass that it is not healthy, then put on medicine with corrosive powder so that the bone is uncovered; and take according to what comes into its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then take the fistula, and open the vein; after put in the opening a subtle camel-hair brush, which is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the molten lead does not run to its eye; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton pad moistened with vinegar or in water: the lead if it is the lead of the fistula, and it heals marvelously through the sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then one must administer pertus to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the nose according to what is suitable for its own location.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks in the way we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then scorch it with a small cautery tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply heat quickly to those cavities until life comes near the source; afterwards treat the affected limb thoroughly until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes a putrid and rotten fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit: then it is necessary to have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron touches the source of it, and behind the affected limb; and do thus one or two times, afterwards treating as we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the affected limb and cut out the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	Here is the translation:
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the jaw is softened, restrained, and the gums are corrupted, dry.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from coldness, where there is coldness or glass, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with wax and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with wax is such that you take wax of a cow, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil it in melted wax, and put it on the aching tooth immediately and hold it until it cools; and thus do often so that its virtue reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wax and cotton are frozen, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron rod so that the virtue reaches to the judgment of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Here is the translation:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make cauterization of the head that you want, and according to what you have power; and it is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	of the scabs
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scabs are of flux and of cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery that you apply afterwards, and it will have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or if the abscess is small, so put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus three days; and put on a soft cotton dressing in a burrow so that the discharge may be drained; after cure the limb of ointments and of tents so that it may be healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures come onto the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by solutive medicines; afterwards make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but only a little. Afterwards make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before so that it may be healthy.
de la toust	of the burnt area
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the lung are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever nor cough, and it is an ancient disease, then make them two fire cauterizations on the ribs in their void; and another cautery between two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a fire cautery pricking the entire cautery that is called "points" because of the form that is previously mentioned in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or however many are needed. After healing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three ridges according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you make three of them in a copy.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, soothe the patient on their back and side; afterwards lift the heart which is within the titillation with two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, apply the fire cautery which has .ij. ners douqueil it is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces just to the side, and there appears the figure of the cautery in twelve cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. ners, for the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tenth and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often is applied to this same nerve because it has eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery iron with skill; after making the patient rest, and not moving the limbs for a long time as long as it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauterizations while pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make multiple cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe as long as you can find, dry and as large and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize. Make a cautery between the forceps and the neck, and make small cauteries descending a little in the part beneath the beard; and make cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little; and make a cautery within the foot, and another above the stomach, and between the shoulders, and as many costs of the foot defy the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but apply it openly as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And they said that some ancients used a cautery of iron similar to a razor, and heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and suddenly the pain ceased, as we have said in the case of the aposteme of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient will die now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the spleen
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the swelling that we have said in divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then there are three manners of fire cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of the manners is that you make three or four fire cauteries, in a line according to the length of the swelling, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all of the fire cautery, and let the patient be calm on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another manner of fire cautery is that you heat the fire cautery which has three nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart that is above the swelling, or where the blood vessels of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the length, according to the length of the body, and the fire cautery is according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Afterwards, you inflame the three nails so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then you remove the fire cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, you cauterize all of the fire cautery with three nails. Afterwards, when it has been treated by prolonged tension for a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery does not benefit the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary to perform four cauteries around the stomach, and one above the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the thigh; and let the cauteries be very close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, let the cautery open for a short time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be a club-like shape which we have shown beforehand; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously mentioned.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too much deeply, lest you would make the citrine water worse, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing thus on both legs, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from the length, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing, that the water is expelled; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by manners of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and strongly, if you make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken before or cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel to each subtle cautery, and three cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each island, and three small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are in the foundation, one or more, and are old and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all deflected downwards near the anus, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one applies great cauterization to the stomach, as it has been said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cauterization; and let the cauterization be long-lasting. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the skin condition named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you encounter thelul, if you heat the cautery that seems to rasp, and then apply it all ablaze on the affected thelul area; and leave your hand so that the cauteries come to the base of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is much of thelul, if you cautery each one as we have said; after the treatment of joints becomes profitable until they are healthy; and if you apply a large cautery on the affected area, it will be of greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer the cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Here is the translation:
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the loins, and from great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you do cautery on the loins on one side and the other at the clavicle cautery which we have mentioned before; and if we place the cauteries in a row, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is mole and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should do cautery on the part of the back above the bladder, where the hairs of the tailbone begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery is as long as the width of a thumb; and you should do one cautery above the back, or three if you have need of it; and the clavicle cauteries according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then it is necessary to make .iij. cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and .ij. cauteries across the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of departure are visible, so it is necessary to cautery the patient on the hip bone with a .i. cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizers are not present to you, make three cauterizers of olive wood, and let the cauterizers be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh area, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the cautery; and the way of making the cautery is in three ways: it is to know that medicines are burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the thigh area in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and have between each cautery a space of the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be of olive wood; no one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the thigh area, because there is three of them in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the circle of the cautery should be on the circumference that we previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is in this manner that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, then make .ij. cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little on the left side; and let the cautery be circular, and let the spaces around the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or near the foot, then apply the cautery where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, then do more; and if it seems that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a circular or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was perceived as corrupt and rotten to the point where they died from a wound in their belly. After which they had a mortal outcome.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two adjacent parts, do cautery on one and the other, in this manner. // And the wise men say that for the cautery of the thigh, it should be done thus: make a fire iron as thick as a small finger nail, or slightly less, and insert it between the skin and the flesh to measure the quantity of a thumb's width; and let the irons be above two inches apart, and also like our nails, and have a well-made iron handle; and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and emits a sweet smell, and then place it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment is finished, until it is fully healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little for fear of its roughness, and we see few who use it; and nonetheless these are good cauterizers, which can suffer, and there where it is applied.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain two backs
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar signs of cold expanded matter, none of these signs is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after this, that the patient is void of filthy pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauterizations at the claw-like cauterizer, according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted spine when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the upper part of the back and in the appearance that comes onto the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then you should cauterize at the cautery site according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If you cauterize each part of the spine equally. And if you want to, then cauterize around the spine at the poignant cautery site .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the joint so it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in a place of nervous spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold causes and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need to prick on the face of the foot, then make cautery at every spot they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knee and other joints, and this happens often, then make cautery on each knee .iij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, to all the olive-colored cautery; and if you have a greater mastery, if you do more, but do not hold your hand further than as long as the space of the heart is burning.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge flux, then it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the vein
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the patient comes to the doctor, and the swelling goes down into the groin area and it is newly inflamed, if it is necessary that when you want to cure the wound, it does not eat anything that day; and it uses things that ease the stomach, so the veins come down from their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the swelling is being repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and mark a sign below the wound on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is pale and it throws out sensations. Then reset the swelling to their place; and the minister holds his hand so they do not return back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the chest that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence again until you reach just to the bone; and beware subtly that the swelling does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and of great people also great according to their measure; afterwards .ii. days cure the place of the cautery of butter so that the burning sensation is removed; afterwards cure other ointments so that it is healthy, and put the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well sucked; and it is necessary that their nourishments be lassatis for a long time, so that the swelling does not burst when they prepare to go to chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made splint, and for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drink and food, and too high spirits; and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I shall describe the treatment of cutting in his chapter afterwards.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, have him make two cauteries of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be heated by the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cautery at the cautery with three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the place of the injury and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the curved parts of the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in no member, or from falling or striking, and that pain lasts long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and be the cauteries according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twists and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommence another cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is nearest, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of the messenger
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The messengers are helped many times by cautery with great aid, and likewise the illness that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy. When you see the disease is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not descend nor delay, lest you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the entire disease, then make the cauteries thus on the head: one on the forehead near the nose, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and one on the horns, and one behind on the temple; and leave your hand so that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit; and cautery on the mouse according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the messengers are scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, then you should make the cauteries of these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in some nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and one other at the sides, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the thigh, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the rear of the calf, lest you burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you make of cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery as long as they are healthy, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the fevers. After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and plasters, but it does not heal, then you perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little way into the skin of the heart; then cure the obstructions until it is healthy. And sometimes one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never intervene unless you are familiar with the members and issues of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "abscesses" is concealed, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almond, each a part; and mix everything together, and tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the body until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chancre begins, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire chancre. And some wise men say that one should do cautery at the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and the more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluousness that it does or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say, too old) and there is little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauterize around many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be. For it will hasten healing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce the view of all the cautery, heat up the cautery of the form it is.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery pierces the heart, and let it be such that the patient feels relieved in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated. After the treatment so that it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a mangling of the limb, for it mangulates the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery with fire, then heat up the cauteries little by little, according to what is needed at the site of the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted may be removed. And then let it stay .iij. days, and apply the cauterized limbs with oil so that the burns from fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the treatment of wounds engendering flesh.  And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this mangling has often been cured by medicine applied with fire cautery in the limb; but all fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine applied in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large false thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two manners. It is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery made like a pen of vaulted iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; afterwards you put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it be thus for three days until it begins to putrefy; then make a poultice of soft savages boiled with wine, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be disrooted from their roots. Then cure the foot of joint pain by anointing so much that it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by the flow of blood to the body, and many times it happens in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply hot water cautery; and it is in such manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of vaulted iron, and put it on the nail and the flesh, that is to say for wormy pores; and put the cane thus that it pierces all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water way deeply to the root; and let the patient feel a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot all from its roots. Thus do one after another, until you clear those which are in the body, then cure the joints that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cauterization between each spine; and one fire cauterization or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive fire cauterization; if they stop shivering, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-producing boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Not once do they appear through decay of the bathed body, or pus-producing boils, which come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle fire cauterization of mistletoe wood, so the point may be taken in the fire, or of aristologe root, or of lentricular cautery. And not once do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are dislodged the superfluous things that come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great decorations of blood from the artery that is cut into the wound that comes to the outer skin, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And every time it happens to no one, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very tightly so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and does not issue further; then apply the olive fire cautery, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and apply the cautery on this vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood issues from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	When one administers a stringent tightening of bandages or meter things burning on, or similar things, it does not profit if they do little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten well so that it is tightened over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still in cold water so often that the blood is congealed and thickened and tightened; and make an inquiry beforehand about those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter all about diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the instruments and causes and equipment and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the head of the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. Some come who are so afflicted with their illness that they die quickly due to the severity of their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather take greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long-lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or behind the cautery, which I have devised from head to foot, because you will find it easier to understand what you have mastered.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too tightly; and it never comes from a known cause that one cannot explain.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen it hastens death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work on some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant whose head was full of water, and the head was growing so much each day that it could not be supported; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it became death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and be as long as we need, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head overhanging each part, and the water spouts out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after cutting, extract all the moisture away. After holding steady the edges of draplets and powders, and add wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and let the head be adjusted, and give the patient dry meat little by little, moistening it so the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine whether the opening of the abscess is large, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and let it be according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and beware of bleeding blood, lest the patient dies from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to have a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not profit at all, then the last resort cure is cautery with fire, which one covers the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, therefore, when you cover the eyes, that the patient makes a movement with his head; then rub the area of a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, and then the patient stretches out his neck under the entire cloth; then look where the veins beat, and the lines of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then mark the lines of the notch, then cover one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument so that the vein is reached just to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the top of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cover above, cutting as much as two fingers' width in traversing.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, then the blood flows back up continuously without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and as it is necessary to put blood in order if it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of the syphac, if it seems that apostemes are forming there, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment with ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migration comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by methods of cures of medicine and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterizations, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of his temples grow back, and tends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is a little restored before some homes that are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract from the patient's neck some drapels, then rub the bone with some rough drap, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Here is the translation:
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is aid to finish the swellings: for it is of greater aid against the swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vessel with much cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when you remove them, be cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, until it is healthy; and if without delay from the artery as soon as you feel it open, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the vessel with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the vessel until the blood is congealed, and raise the vessel of cold water until the blood ceases, and be steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery of .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to wait longer for their healing.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of the blood.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the .ij. cutlery .i. degree of thickness, and then when you have signed with the .ij. leus, and you put the iron rod on top until it reaches just to the bone, and cover the vein in .ij. leus; and be separated between the .ij. joints for it is not supported by this cautery from all to all; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are above the soft part of the forehead, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and they feel like they are walking with a tremble as if with phlegm; and thus they are tired and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And the ancient ones called it "counter-strike cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that they have on their forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three digits going into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three digits along the edge above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound have the quantity of three fingers at the joint.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you will apply a piece of sponge and much of cloth to suck out the blood, then put the spatula, guided by three fingers, in the form of the wound.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is to be made at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the crust that is between the two flaps of skin to the very bone which is above the eye socket, then make another section of the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like instrument.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cauterizing iron near the raw flesh of the heart, and the gentle cauterizing iron towards the bone, and the instrument as far as it reaches the middle incision. And cut away the veins that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues until what opens at the heart, and then further make an incision in the middle until the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the vein for the blood taken; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and put on soft drapery moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and be careful that no abscesses form there; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a great quantity of tepid water, then cure with basilicon ointment and other cures for wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	"to remove the eyelids"
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When none of the veins flow with accustomed fluency, and you see the eyelids small and weak, and to dim the vision, and the burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in perpetual pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that catharr are not from many veins, and the death cure that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you command the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another of equal size. First, begin from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the incision reach just to the bone; and hold your hand near the temples that move with the finger; and when the bone is exposed, suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton; then lay a warm drapery soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is inflamed, you must rub the bone so that the flesh begins to grow, then cure with things that expel char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take nine parts of flour of wheat, and of colocynth nine parts, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to heal them completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of these nine things: either grains, or beasts, or rock fragments or similar things like iron; or seeds, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear rock or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the rock, if you distill a little violet oil or sesame oil, then make an extraction; and when you have made an infusion, and the nostrils are cleared when the infusions come, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, then make an extraction with subtle pinches, from which is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Here is the translation:
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not sweat from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear in this way: an abscess appears with a vein and spasm; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until he is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is in and it inflates, then administer extraction; and if he cannot urinate, then administer the spatula with subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer incision of that grain. But do not make it so when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Here is the translation:
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus like a pimple and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel, thus begin the extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, thus it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if no worms appear, thus take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, thus take the candle of what is their form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck forth in the form of a candle; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, thus block with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not escape thus, thus begin distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to its form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper narrow below at a small opening, and above overs to distill; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the rasping and wrap around the point with cotton; then throw in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the rasping all the cotton, and press your hand temperately so that the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it within, and thus are the distillations a little warmed by fire, just as one distills it in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have any hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes go deep into the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole is small and one sees them well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which goes deep, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this you see that you must put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look within: if you see apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatium from which it is formed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and straight in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not obstruct the ear; if the opilation is from flesh born or growth of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until this flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilations are deeply seated in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels great grief in the ear, probe lightly, and beware not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and apply gentle pressure in the Egyptian manner.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not leave it for a day until the wound is sewn up, or take a tent and apply gentle pressure in rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another gentled tent made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is gone; then cure until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the flow of blood comes, plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the flesh of papyrus
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are without decay, if the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is good, and the cautery operator is skilled after the incision is effective; and many times they repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the crust
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things that seem crusty in their form and hardness come from the eyes, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the works are such: take warning if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make a donkey's pace large, then lightly scratch each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing a little of the crust, do not grieve anything to the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble at a costure, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointments restore it quickly and injure the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends to the depths of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the crust, and hold the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the crust is separated by incision, do not grieve anything; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty oil, and cure the limb of what injures the flesh as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is deposited in the tears of the eyes above, and this happens more to young children, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have a morning discharge, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces again, and sleep on them, and their eyelids beneath are moist that the inflammation and appearance are covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press your fingers against it and feel the exinach entering within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then place it on them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a small incision in the moisture at the sharp edge, and let it not be larger than the wound made for opening a vein; and make the skin deep enough until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions comes exinach from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is expanded; and beware that you do not touch in the incision, that you do not reach the entire sharp edge just up to the eye, that you do not blur it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the patient does not open at the beginning of the wound, apply a little pressure to the wound lightly so it opens; then hold steady as we have said, then wrap in soft cloth and water, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is delayed. Then heal until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then heal with emplasters soothing until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs unevenly other than natural, and are enveloped, they harm the eyes, and bring on ways of sickness such as accustomed tears and mollifications of the papers and albumen, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three ways: either by cautery with fire altogether, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, stick a needle all the way into the filament; and let it be beneath the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull the filament to the top of the paper, and turn it to the ruler; then do in the part beneath the paper, beneath the hairs aligned, all the way to the spatula, from the great hammer just to the small one; then extract the filament, and place beneath the paper a small cushion of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as if the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a task to cope with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then do all the way to the spatula on the .ij. lines that you signed, and start from the great hammer just to the small one; and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then stick the needle in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then scrape everything; then assemble the .ij. lips on a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make an adjustment to the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows all the way to some sticky things, if you see fit to do it; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the thread and the filaments for three days or four; then treat the wound without a thread of dry and constricting things, because the paper relives suddenly at the touch of the wound and its assembly, but the thread is putrid (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, to three ounces of subtle wool according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply the ointment which surmounts the small equal forces harmoniously according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or it has a thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread from the large latticework, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a cerote and similar soothing ointment.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and often it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it thick according to what I have said, and then make artificial seams by art, and subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and apply thus the heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the form of the parchment of the eye, and extract the artificial seams from the formed parts; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin which is restrained will become more tender and numb and porous, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	Here is the translation:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Here is the translation:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and the hairs do not come with it, then pull the hair to the bottom along the entire thread that you have ordered, so that the hair comes forth through two pertuses above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the hair and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 9 or 10 days, until the hair takes root in its place and grows from the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with a long natural hair, and be elevated with that one you leave, so that it is elongated and then set free.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the sight of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the sight of the eye comes, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a burn, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way of working on it is that you close the wound, and separate the lips from it, and put in tentes of flax, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but working with mollifying things, such as fenugreic; and rose water or sweet milk, and a seed of flax is cooked, and an ointment of dyapilon is founded in none of the eyes, and it is enveloped in a tent, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to not let it slip according to the form it was in before; and these works that we have said are only addresses of this illness, so it does not relapse according to the form it was in before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This illness that is beneath which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread goes into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a spatula large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is desired, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fracture, and turn the papyrus, and make two fractures or cuts within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two fractures of the two angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as good as the figure of a letter which has no "j" curve; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are thus gathered, from what follows the papyrus, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then apply the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and of tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or a break or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is before; then uncover between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make it return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of treatment and of remedies in many different ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	by sudden movement of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this joining has occurred in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it up high; and hold as pincers, until you catch what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too sharp or cutting the oil; and make your incision, removing what is assembled, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and it is all healthy, and never again in the sharp oil, but with gentle lifting, and with a bandage; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of water; and after three days use gentle bandages and soothing things as much as possible.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner is affected in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard thick scab, and another which is not nervous, but similar to a pale moist congealed humor, when one touches it with iron and cuts it with pincers, if it cannot be removed; and both appearances begin from the great artery, and gradually increase until it covers the entire sight and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and holds the paper with one hand, then coils the corner with pincers of small double curvature, and stretches it upwards; then takes a needle, and inserts a horse hair, or a cow's hair, or an ox's hair, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and fixes it in the corner, and pierces it with the entire needle, and ties the corner with a thread and stretches it upwards, and removes all the surrounding hair from the corner which takes away the pruning and the sewing of the hair just to the head, then cuts the remaining part at the root of the artery with subtle and small forces, and leaves the natural or arterial flow, so that by the incision the body does not lose its accustomed flow; and no time is it stretched to the corner solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then removes all the subtle parts surrounding what is there in this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the artery does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision, puts a little of warm broth in the eye, and makes a collyre of litargire, and leaves it until the next day; then cures what is there, as much as it needs to be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medicines; and grows as I have counted in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly and gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see it diminishes to a point and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the collier eye making litargyre and red collyrium and broiet, and stop up the eye just until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, until it is completely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, just as an aposteme heats up, then milk it, and first cure the heated aposteme until it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts at night in the eye by great nuisance, then suspend it on the onion, and cover a part but not entirely, because the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the red collyrium eye which is made of litargyre.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the thumb
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	It is the eyes of certain men that grow a red flesh, and cover the thumb and restrain it with bandages and turn it to the duty, and seem like a rose of baluster; and the works are such that the patient puts his head in his healthy state, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as uncines convenient to him, and holds it with strength; then he covers the first flesh, and goes entirely covering to the raspier until the end, and take care not to blister at the work; and be the incision so gentle spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail and the small forces from which one detaches the sebum, just like the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, apply the oil of that broiet or where you distill coliere rouge and seem corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with vinegar and water, so it may be assured against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the blood mounts to the surface, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the eye and cure the abscess with appeasing things for hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make many characters that are adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But however it is necessary that you elevate the cure of each oil weak from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they obstruct the sight and make the eye weak every day. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which part it is, if it is outside, and there is no other illness except for the vein; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then hold those veins on the entire eyebrow according to his wisdom, and let the fine double eyebrows be subtle according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the eyebrows be divided by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then coil the veins subtly, and extract the blood hourly after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not blind the eye at points of the spectacle, and perform this operation at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your operation so that you do not cope with anything except those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is remaining of the vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all this at that hour, make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are eased and are assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is presented beforehand until it is healthy; and this is the form of the remedies.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the abscess, there where it must be opened, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you remove all the instruments of which it is the form; and it is called "asperous head", and make it into a iron instrument, and sharpen it like a lime as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Here is the translation:
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	Here is the translation:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the patient's joint where the artery is, and withdraw your hand from the eye .i. little by little, then turn until the entire forearm reaches the joint and the patient feels it through what the veins are in this way if they hold their hand near their nose; and then restore the patient's limb with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endures the limbs, thus goes the matter to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open fully everywhere, and it does not come to disturb the nose, nor diminish, thus you must bind the patient; then the healthy, then place cupping glasses or heated irons to suck without piercing, then put on the eye .i. make a mixture of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply a plaster made of bandages and drapels; and the way of the drapels is that you take drapels quite soft, and double each in .iii., and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs most; then strain with a hard bandage formed, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye be strained day and night, and if it becomes inflamed, thus you must stretch it much; then remove the strap after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, then reapply the plaster and the drapels and the strap and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of the web-like membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the disruption comes to the veiled pupil, then opens, and comes forth like grains of resin, and is astonishing to see; then if you cover the sight, the works are such that you insert a needle in the root of the part below, up to the one above, then insert another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the whole with the double thread and tie a part of the pupil around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put it on the moist eye in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads stick with the pupil, then heal the eye with comforting things so the wound is healthy; and often the wound is restrained by the pupil, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes make a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends to the eyes, and enters immediately; then hold it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the hollow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	the eyes of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the similarity of eyes in division, and that which must be pierced; if it works according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye steady and extremely firm; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right side; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left side, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right side; then put the point of the instrument at the crown by the thickness of a hair from the edge of the eye to the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" carefully, and twist your hand until it penetrates into the edge of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the opening in this paper by the clarity of the woven fabric, and then put the instrument next to where the eye is, then press one way after another. If the eye descends now, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After rest, and if the eye rises a second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the eye a little of the gemstone's seal, and remove from that the eye within. Then put on top of the eye estoupes or lainne moillie in oil rosset and abundance of egg, and tie with the healthy eye.  Us, and those who are of our tension, put on common broth with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the medicine cannot enter the eye due to its thickness, because there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is of this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva slightly, and do not press too hard in the front, but make it subtle, then put in the medicine, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient dormantly, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary not that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten for that, because the water mounts hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If abscesses come, you should untie the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, then untie the vision and put on his face a golden ornament to cover for no day, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and settle into its cases; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made a certain medicine called "almagda perciet", which drew out the water, but however I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly prepared.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And thus the head of the augurs of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angled points.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No time born or nose chars joined diversely, because there are some that seem scorpions with many feet; and if there is such a one where the flesh is colored with fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In this way of those chars which is soft, and not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the onion at those chars, and draw out the fibers; then hold what you can sustain with the subtle spatula on one side, so that you know that this char is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, drain it as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then pour in water or vinegar and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose does not open, and moisture comes up to the palate, it shows that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as needed, it shows that there is new flesh in the above-mentioned bone, with which the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary to insert .i. a thread of linen, a little thick, and sew it with our hands, and have an interval of about one spatium; and put the patient's head at the end of the thread in their nose, and draw it out by pulling so that it comes through the nose into the mouth; and often children do this as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after another while being careful as we are with thread. Do this until you know that the nostrils have cleared that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a tube in the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a tube, and lead them thus; and if you see, make a close tube, and let the instruments be plain for cleansing the head; and have .i. a holder at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a malady called "telul" appears on the head near the nose, and grows and becomes large, until it is visible to behold; and therefore you must cover it at the beginning, and remove all hair, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay covering it until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an abscess that grows inward, because when one covers it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that you can cover it entirely, then the patient will be relieved and the treatment of dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is covered and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, for in some homes. Therefore, it is necessary to observe if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the .ij. veins to a joint, then cure until it is healthy; and if the veins are already separated from one part and another, it is necessary that you scrub all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the .ij. veins to a joint, and constrict, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, hard, resembling grains of vezes, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them with pincers and cover each part; then apply the liquid after the incision of vitriol broth, until the blood is stanched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a sore appears on the gums where it is attached, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary to support it with tongs, and apply it to its root, and let the blood or sap flow; then put on top of it vitriol powder, or other drying and astringent powders; and if that sore returns after the incision, and many times happens, so apply it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return anymore after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatment for covering.
des sordens	of the abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes abscesses gather at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, ulcers that are wide and tight; and sometimes the black, yellow, and green teeth, as long as the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their heads be in your holy, and take out the teeth or ulcers appearing, so that nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, as long as they are removed; and if you remove what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatment to be restored, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one removes from the teeth have other forms than those between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you well-prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay to treat it as soon as you can, for this should not be done otherwise; for it is a very high substance just up to then so that one has no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Here is the translation:
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the right tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out by itself, take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you had done previously. And if the teeth are perceived as being gnawed and worn away, it is necessary that you fill them with material, wherever the gaps are; and if you hold it subtly in place with bandages, so it does not break while holding it in place; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care not to break it, and leave a part remaining, and reveal to the patient through the malice of the root, which causes greater pains than at first. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not heal what we have recounted; but rather come frequently through the observation of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or through the instrument breaking, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is decayed, wash it with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows, which often happens, apply vitriol ointment; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which you use to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large limbs so they do not bend in the stretcher, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be tightened by muscles to hold.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the stretcher, then you must put on the cotton cloth soaked in bitter water on the third or fourth day, until the limbs are softened, then you apply the clamps called "algefri", of which the head seems to be a beak-like instrument; and let them be made thus like a file and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these clamps, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and big so that it does not break, and if the root jumps by itself, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come here afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has many grooves, from which the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front of the rows of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be these instruments strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their work and the illness show them, because there are some illnesses where the ancients did not teach at all about an instrument due to the diversity of wounds, and it breaks or cracks in the cartilage or other bones, or it rots, if one seeks these instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, from which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and well-gripping to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but then holds and opens; and then restore to the bone suitable medicines according to that, and if there is porousness in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its form is ugly, and especially in small women, if it happens that you know the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot soothe or file: then take the root; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron sharpened at the tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping is little by little in the jaws for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a similar file as its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the jaws gently, so that it does not move until it settles; then smooth out the roughness at the end without any rasp, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it happens to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth falls out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when the front tooth falls out, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it doesn’t fall out, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but it is of no value; if they need to be restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and let the medium-sized thread not be too large or too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the sound teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the sound tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all; and let your thread be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then take the heads of the thread in pincers, and assemble them, and put them back between the sound tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its life, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the sound teeth, and of the bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, gradually, as we have said; and do not meddle with those who are not skilled and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and let it stay and serve thus long life.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from the burning of the thread of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes it is the thread that comes from under the tongue by nature, which you do not see; or by accident of a hidden wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous thread as large, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you remove the uncleanness and cut as large as the ligament; and beware that the wound is not too deep in front, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the water of rose and of hay, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and tie the patient each night, so they cannot swallow. And if bad blood comes, put on the lead vitriol bruise; and if the blood does not come, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for that; then cure another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the thread of a foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it declines into a whitish color, and there is moisture, then remove the uncleanness, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not come to your work, put on vitriol bruise as large as it can be stained, then return to your work until you treat everything fully; then lift the water of hay and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Here is the translation:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Here is the translation:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle with tongs, because it is of the same form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one part and naming on the other part; and when you have taken hold of one of the embers, take hold of the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and hot and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then heal it so it is healthy; and no other abscesses will grow in the throat except for the .ij. embers, if you take hold of them thus like the .ij. embers immediately.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was situated deep in the throat, it is to know .i. a small abscess of little sense; and had almost entirely closed up the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess had grown so large that it had almost filled .ij. veins through the .ij. pores of the nose. I hastened then, and inserted an onion, then made a poultice, and in the poultice put a great portion of wine; then I did another part in the other pore of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the onion into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and only issued forth a little blood; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink hot wine, and did not cease to lance this abscess for a long time; and the abscess receded again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it deep in the throat: thus remained without growing worse; and I departed from those parts, and knew only that God did with her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not that of cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put it thus, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot there is an instrument that cuts according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it is of silver or copper, and one of the heads is placed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, it recommences often, so that the eye dries, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this for fear of the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the head a piece of egg white, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or anything; so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will extract further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument for extracting according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instrument be at the top of the head so it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may go wrong, nor insert it within; and it is worth that the patient inserts the instrument, because it should be inserted or the thing is in vain; if it goes below, where it draws everything equally, as long as it goes equally.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the sensitivity of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is suitable for the sensitivity, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then gaze into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw everything out with a small hook, or subtle tongs that are worth this. And if it is not worth it, take a hooked needle, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert or remove the hooked needle with gentle movement, and do it repeatedly. And if the patient feels all day long, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and gargle in sense of swallowing, and move it with his hand repeatedly; and if you feel as soon as the sensitivity feels the cold, spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not spit out as we have said, then subfumigate the patient with absinthium, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the uva; do this many times, for it will soon clear. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let the post be covered with a pierced tin plate in the middle, and in that perforation let the head of the instrument be; then you make the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will clear now, and if it does not spit out, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then the liver will be purged by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the wound, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see there the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings here after one and another in this book, and they diverge in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. ways, one of which is in its own resemblance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second way is through the veins where they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is ripe according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are of the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is of the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is of the foundation, one pierces it so that it is ripe; and one must not pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one that is of the foundation, which does not ripen in the front, and becomes long within, and it creates a fistula; and one cannot heal it in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is mortal according to the completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from the fever, and the diminishment of the pain and of the redness, and the soft debating and of the appeasement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and be the perforation of the long of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and in the veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no putridity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these that putrefy, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is necessary that you leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the body will be full of great disorder; and by chance the lips and the deep parts of it will harden. And if there is an abscess that is pierced according to the largeness of the body, according to the member that has most need.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the skin of the head comes to form small abscesses, and there are ways for us that are in tiles, just like a layer of jelly, and much of it has similarities. There is fat and such things where moisture accumulates, just like poultice; and if there are such things that are hard and rocky when cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary. And the work of the cut is that you should try everything .i. instrument that is called "entromissoire", because its form comes hereafter, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then the poultice is made above the lonc. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; otherwise, with water and vinegar, and treat the wound, and let it be until another day; and this continues what has remained of the nit. Then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not remain of the nit; then cure the wound with ointment suitable for that, so it may be healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. a fat nut, then cut according to this form, above the lonc; and throw away your onions, and scrape off from all parts, and put all your treatment in order to make the skin where it lies; and if the artery does contrary to you, then do what I have told you after. And thus do with the abscess if it is rocky, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cut above the rocky abscess and the moisture, is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of those .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman's head; and found the abscess just like a rotten stone, rough and whitish, and could not be broken; and if one had taken out any, one would have done well to make a wound as from a rotten stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, because they come as heads of children and roots of ears, the treatment should be done for at least ten days, depending on the need to remove the pus; and the cures are done as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scabs
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times there occur abscesses on the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come from another part of the body. And they are numerous, and are joined together with each other. And each abscess has its own proper place, just like the nut and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these abscesses are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, you see a good disposition in the body, and it appears similar to the color of the skin, and changes in each part and is not airy as the nerve from the neck or the artery or conduit; and it is not deep; so you should cover it from above, and scrape off each part, and make the .ij. veins of the heart as usual, if you are skilled in this, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and pull little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cut too much, so you do not touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you touch the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put a vitriol ointment on the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then seek with your finger to see if there remain any small scabs, and cover them and bandage them. And if there is a great vein at the root of the scab, it does not seem that you should cover that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cover the whole scab, it seems that you should assemble the .ij. veins of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no longer any superfluousness due to the greatness of the scab. It seems that you should understand how to cover the root of it, and pull firmly, and sew as we have said. Those scabs that hold superfluousness, pierce where they appear; and pierce thus as was previously stated, depending on the circumstances, then you will mix them with ointment and similar things, so that they do not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well bandaged, heal it with ointment in a warm manner, until it is healthy.
de squinance	of scalping
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke of the surgery of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it's the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have scalping, it is necessary that the partition of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the mouth of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the mouth, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four a small cut through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut through the surface, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if it is convenient to cut at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be freed.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the whole onion, then cut the heart as far as it reaches the os hyoides; and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the surface, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the os hyoides which falls through the place that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed from which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with gentle care, and sew it all together without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	But beware that one does not do this just then when the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then one should cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore command the old man to let the open wound be so long as the evil of the disease is not passed, and it is passed in three days or in two days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they command to cauterize the wound and treat, until it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the curator, and found him almost as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered with a bandage or dressing, except for the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I did not have to cauterize the young woman because she was hoarse of voice, and recovered afterwards according to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural does not have any engagement.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two manners, one of which seems to us like a thick abscess, and the other manner seems to us like an abscess that comes from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate with fierce fires except in the small one, and it proves and searches for all the interior of the abscess.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus, as if a thick abscess, and it does not penetrate to any vein, so the blow, so as one blows the nostrils, and it draws out all its filth, if there is a point.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine everything well, and heal it so that it may be perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is suitable that I tell all the differences that exist between them and this.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the illness is fever and chill, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it is accomplished by the putridity; then the fever and chill are restored.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the ninth node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to the appearances, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are thus as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form will be or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or make more moist the spot where you find the abscess, and turn your two fingers thus, thus, until you feel that the instruments have perceived the kernel, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this, that it knows how to force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the corroding humor flows, which has its color, then it does so as I have said about other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entromissoire no corroding humor comes, it knows that it is fat, then it does so in a cross, and takes it with pincers, and lightly scrapes each part and turns the coat where it lies, so that you treat it healthy with the nouement.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot treat it healthy, then divide it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he remains there, he returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he stays there a little, and the wound does not grieve him, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat other wounds until he is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is great to us, then cut the edges of the wound, and treat what injures the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is swollen against the contrary or otherwise, then hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol, and let it stay for two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what has been delayed from now on.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles with which one cuts the sores, and are of iron citrin, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow, and are more experienced at piercing the black pustules to encircle the fistulas;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three curves of three manners also;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are lancets that have three curves, and they are also of three manners; and if there are lancets that have two curves, and some with a single curve only, and they are of three manners; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is cut into sections, and of those there are some that do not cut except for one part, from which the nails are scraped, because they do not touch the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introjections are the humors collected in the joints, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: great, small, and moderate, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and they do not move except in the clear skin, as in the legs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to a fistula scalpel, according to this form, in order to staunch blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one places it sometimes at the healthy spot that connects to the veins, and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the limbs of some men, when they begin to be corrupted, seem like those of women.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they become weak and inflamed, and those who want to cure them, if one wants to succeed according to this form of these lines up to G.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in the manner of a charm, then join the lips of the wound to the scar, and heal it until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and the breast is sloping downward, and it is swollen because of its greatness like women have, if they make a scar above, through similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B up to line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and mix together what we have said about scars and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it absorbs the residue and fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the seats are a kind of hard scrofula, where there are ribs, and it is because they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Here is the translation:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire abscess is empty, fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment to make it healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes hollow, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and it also happens to have an inflamed vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes it then as much as it is through the artery, then are the abscesses long in advance;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, then feel the contraction; and when it is through the vein, then are the signs of fever appearing;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to hide this abscess, and likewise when it is under the arms and in the groin and in the neck and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and he who is at the head must avoid it also, and in him who has a inflamed artery, it is done above the skin of the long muscle;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work the waist as onions, and beautifully detach the artery of the veins, so that it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce right up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two veins, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the place which is between the two veins of an introductor, as much as the blood flows out from it, and let the abscess be drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that induces a flow downwards, so that the vein is cleared.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal this one of anointing coming to this one, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscesses are by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as one ties a knot with double thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then rebury another needle entirely in the same place beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three loops;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess until the superfluid comes out, then cut away from the bad humour and let what is tied loose;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often with joints and fingers or toes where there are joints, and this is the grievous abscess, and its color appears like the color of a dead body, and it is in many painful conditions.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not like the depth of the body, but beneath the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it must be well examined in all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and the one who is in joints does not deserve to be treated with iron: perhaps there will be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin rough and scaly.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if it has a tender hold, and the head is in its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if they suspend from the groin, and scrape, then cut into the bone and assemble the wound to the ribcage, and treat until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of thick bulging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never has it occurred in the belly and not another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance, and it is a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had .ij. or wind in the belly which was more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little root, and it was cut here and there, and it was corrupt with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you see if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when the tailor comes, often too great a flow of blood occurs, and if the wound does not close, then hasten to give the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it .ij. days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then hold it back, and do not cease from holding the thread of the probe as long as it touches the joint, and feels by itself without effort; and if the roots are thick, then you should fear to cut them immediately for the belly, but you can well cut most of it,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of faulty color and of poor sense and of bad regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscess hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	Here is the translation:
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is by the rupture of the skin and by the outlet of the boil, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it recedes, and then returns, and sometimes it happens that it becomes narrow, and grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine if the appearance is by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign from below around the bowel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct him to place his hand between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place where you have signed to the entire spine,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then is the majority of the abscess above all the great groin;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then wrap it tightly with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk, and let the joint be firmly bound;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then operate on the majority of the abscess extended above the joint, and you should press with your indexed finger, and examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find the true veins of the joint, then dislocate them, and press the intestine back into its proper place in the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it on the ankle, and cut off the excess flesh;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery makes a counter movement, or the vein, if you go slowly inside, then return to your work and take nine needles, and push nine strong threads, and push the nine needles inside so that you have done it in a crosswise manner to make it pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in three places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb rest until it purifies, and clear the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you cut when it is subtly purified and purged, then cure what needs to be cured, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	Here is the translation:
dou chancre	where boil
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of boils, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron; and let us say that a boil is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are on the skin or where they can be rooted out like a boil that is in the muscles, and in the hip, and in similar places, and it must be totally excised when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal it; nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is on the skin or where they can be excised, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make them healthier if they show obvious repletion, then make the patient ready for the operation; then cut into the boil or chancre, and shave all around, and remove everything without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the skin with your hand or anything else, and see that the remaining blood does not contradict the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the wound is staunched; then treat with another treatment until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	Here is the translation:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look to see if the dropsy is in the direction of the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel .iij. two fingers right above the pubic bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient guide themselves according to the incision, lest the superfluous fluids do not flow to the weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Here is the translation:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top is the almond, if it happens that the strument comes to the water, if you sink now on the instrument; look at the finger then, which part or the third part, for if you sink more than it doesn't suit in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he becomes powerless, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but look at the finger according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick signified, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cord that closes the passage which is on the skin, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do it on no day, and guard yourself from fooling around until there's only a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the tomb or sepulcher is hot, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you abstain from drinking; and the treatment with desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Here is the translation:
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the rod and the handle similarly to the size of a pen, so that the perforated knife cuts in the middle, as it should; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, then staunch what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the pimples on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad ulceration; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle onion-like application, and cover and bind all, then put on a soft cotton dressing in an Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment application thoroughly until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then you must apply caution. When you have covered it, and the ulcer is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is softened, then cure what is outside. For when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into the rod or in the conjunction; so you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply the poultice made of honey and flour which is made from crushed pomgranate seeds and veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the flow of blood comes, one must aid the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries are of ten dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must boil or conduct a vein of lead, and piss on the patient; and when the skin is dry at the head of the rod which has been in those who have not been circumcised, either from wound or abscess, then one must scrape it with a .i. instrument that cuts, so that the veins are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then one must scrape it with a .i. spatula at the head of the rod and skin; then separate it gently between .ij., and put .i. subtle drapery of linen on the wound in cold water, so that it does not become dry again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old men did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in this way, and with great force, and to a new incision; if they found the cord because it has two layers, and by chance they cut above and delayed below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now they recover the copula, and the pain is double, and in the mundification which is not assured at the point of the limb; and in the mundification of the ankle by chance they escape the iron, and corrupt the vein, and many times they are born thus that they have no need of mundification and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mundification which is done with great force to the entire thread of the filament, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Because when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in the entire soul's tension; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and be the manner of the first work so that you make the infant think, if it understands, that you do not make him suffer more than to tie the thread around the rod as gently, and then make it relax in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in place; then clean well the ordure that is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie beneath another link; and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouchet and at the index finger, and cover between the links, then hold the heat above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a dressing made with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, congealed with oil of roses, good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it can be healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be trenching, and should be the heads as large as the equal measurement:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be so long as the abscesses are appeased, and scrape lightly; if you cut thus as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Herefore heal the wounds made by powder, that we have spoken of in treating powders, and if you cut too deeply outside measure, and it goes to the bottom, it will not harm; heal herefore, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction of stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or carnal nerve, or similar things, that we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not flowing, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and his belly should be stretched out above his back, and he should hold himself straight as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine is not flowing;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "siringue", of which this is the form: and let it be of subtle silver, light and thin like a bird's feather; and let the tube be one palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double filament, and tie it to the end of a thread or cotton, and insert the end of the filament into the siringue; and stop up the excess thread and insert it just at the end of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and olive oil, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist oil and oil of olives and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then insert the siringue gently into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowl; then insert the siringue just before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty vessel, and this is not done according to this order for fear that the conduits or it will be twisted; then stretch the filament throughout the entire thread little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it forcefully, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and instruct to apply the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient's aligning should be alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or pus accumulates in the bladder, or when putrid matter is gathered there, and you have seen it distilled into waters and medicines, thus make all the instrument called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has .iij. perforations: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the veins are chosen by which the medicine flows so well that it stops the flow of urine sensibly, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and expel when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see gather your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizing instrument in the moisture, and draw out the drawing-out instrument that is inside; if you draw out the moisture to the cauterizing instrument, and then strongly reinsert the drawing-out instrument inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and it is the subtle form of theclyster that one uses to clysterize the bladder: this is it:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below are the veins or sinews of the back; then take a bladder of a sheep and put in the moisture that you see clysterize the bladder, then tie it between two filiform double-layered bovine fibers, and heat that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of theclyster into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to bring all the moisture together, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a doll, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done for the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtlety; and it openly hurts, and grievously afflicts the patient's penis, and they often suffer, and then become swollen; and many of these symptoms are the foundation; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very difficult for the old, and it's as if it's a medium age, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a clyster, to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the stone's removal.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and pull them out and move to the bottom, so that the foot descends to the front of the bladder, and rises several times high up; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands should be beneath their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely leaning down; then you ask and touch from within.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone. And if it does not fall at the touch of everything, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your left middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and place it at its foundation, and ask about the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, anoint it at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you saw to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand above the loins, and with their left hand lift the skin that is beneath the loins in the part where the cut is made; then they place the spatula-like instrument, which is of this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make a space between what is between the loins and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left nipple; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be at the foundation, and be the cut traversing so that it is wide by default, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Here is the translation:
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Here is the translation:
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	Here is the translation:
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put it on with a covering of soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, rub well the area with oil and water, then apply the treatment of diyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then lift the wound with water and sage and silk, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the sores that you cure, that you bind the joints, and assemble the medicines on the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if you cure it in this way that I say, that you often cut, it is excused from the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at three angles fixed in the tissue:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take the thread and wrap it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the iron in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another part; if the urine comes out soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the rod. If it breaks thus, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this because of some obstacle that bothers him, then thread the stone beneath and another above, then make the rod in the place of the stone between the three ligatures, then extract it forcibly, and untie the ligature, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until he is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens sometimes, then the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with her own body, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's womb is more deeply embedded than the stone in a man's, because it fits more deeply into the cavity, and there is great fear involved.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to remove it, then you should take a wise and well-acquainted midwife, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle and chaste midwife; and she presents a wise and knowledgeable life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command her to do regarding the inquiry into the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and carefully examine if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her finger or foundation on the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she put her finger or with the patient, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder in formation.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she must move it gently from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, where it appears moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and let the waist be at the first small size.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the ruler on the waist, if you feel the stone, increase the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many types of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. Know the similarities to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the stone does not come out, put the vitriol broth on the spot, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools to help you in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if he has no sense, and it is of the artery that is injured, then put powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the veins are rested, then return to your work, until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white flux, which is beneath the skin of the intestines, containing the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the intestine between the white flux that we have spoken of; and this has not happened often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this remedy is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's a declining yellowish hue, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or pale as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, i.e. almost long as the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, if it feels very good; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the interstitial quarter thoroughly, because its form is here before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the interstitial quarter, judge from what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should lean on his back, on a somewhat elevated thing, and put many folds of drapery under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he should sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the hollow of the joints.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just below where it pricks, and make your incision straight in dividing the skin of the joints until you reach the white fascia, and carefully scrape off the subtle layer according to what you can do.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white fascia with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then place your hooks, and let the fascia be above; and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the fascia should; cut out all or in pieces the cartilage of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the swelling subside for a few days, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia; then assemble the two leaves of the core of the joints into a union, then cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the swollen area corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the deterioration of blood; then cut out the joint with all its suspension, and remove the swelling, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft oil rosé.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put further another soft linen in wine and oil, and put on the two cushions, and put above doubled drapery, and bind it with all the lien that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two drapery, and fill with linen scraps according to this likeness and be assembled by sewing in the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes on the foundation just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and another two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and at no time is medicine made from this cautery iron rod, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the cushions, and be warmed up as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the aigue is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take fire cautery according to this form, and prick that surface as on an onion, and scrape it with this subtle fire cautery thus:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the scalp in all the ways that you can, as much as you stretch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of the flow of blood, and remember that the operations of the belt.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or flows of blood or other things, then cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horribleness, then make a small perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining watery discharge, then treat until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and let the white cloth not allow the watery discharge to issue from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a pen or instrument through which one treats the watery discharge of hydropic wounds, because its form is thus before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the watery discharge returns, and is gathered together after 22 months or within, and when it is gathered together as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear of more severe complications, because it seems to me that it is worth leaving it, for I believe it will be worse.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and similarly from bad humors; and it is for many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be known by excessive bitter anger and fever, which is spread through bad humors, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is a painful abscess, green and pierced, and of changed color, and sometimes comes from the swelling of an artery, or the inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to the swelling of an artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not think that you should touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from the inflammation of a vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of tender touch with the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can well make the incision according to this likeness, and on the other wounds;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the veins, then place the egg white above, and remove the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already mixed with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is on the skin, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all of this tension, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of flesh is where the back skin is, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of lime and rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in a wrapping resembling a .i. bag, with the softening of the groin,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient must be gently moved when they walk;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this illness is well pressed as much as possible beforehand.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high seat, then bind him with suspensor strings from the hips down to his toes.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are close to the edge, and prick the masters, and stretch them forth;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the place of the vessels, until they are discovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the vital spirit has come, and then tie it again to another head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he applies the cup in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupt humors.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as if the others or an injury to the bow, so that no vessel bursts which nourishes one of the intestines.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for through this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this hernia are by the section that comes from the face, or the extension onto the belly in the region of the loins, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the flanks;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this route is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is equal abscesses just as far as the pelvis, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the swelling, which brings about sudden severe pain at its onset, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the body's weakness from the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestine, and is retained within, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron to fear, because they think it will escape them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to hold their intestine in their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and cover all the skin of the thighs from top to bottom.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then thrust inside the kidneys of the waist uncinated according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes may issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the dead skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so much that the white skin underneath should be uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then put your index finger into the one that guides the joint, into the one that is between the white skin underneath which is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second skin;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white skin above with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the skin near the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and separate what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you find a point in the intestine wrapped or white thick syrupy and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or it has a large thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the thick syrupy substance, which is after the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the thick syrupy substance, which we have said is beneath the skin of the intestines, with a strong bond of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them cannot enter there, lest an abscess forms and does not heal;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the bandage according to the first bandage long; it should be two fingers wide, and after these two fingers let the swelling that is beneath the heart of the joint, which is the biggest part of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the joint, until the vein flows, and the bow, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then soften the mole in oil, and put it in wounds, and I soften the bandage that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the white swelling cauterized, as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood corruption.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Here is the translation:
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a flesh wound
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done in the same way as the wound that is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting slightly underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who labor, as long as the vessels bleed; and heal it in the way we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and opens the limbs; and do not dissect any of the intestines to the sides, and if you do, it is little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or sphac thinks, as long as the intestine dissects;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this occurs through the extension of the swollen veins which are in the limbs, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflated the limbs and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by fire cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then cover the affected area with a large poultice according to the quantity of two dot doi.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the superficial skin that is under the skin which is inflamed, then take the remedy and put it on the apparent affected area of the superficial skin;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and apply pressure at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent skin lesions of the superficial skin on the head of the remedy, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch the point of the swelling that it does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal by healing wounds. And when you touch the fibers, if it is swollen and heals the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are moved away from this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the groin
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Here is the translation:
dou chastrement	do cautery of fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des hermofrodites	Of the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hemorrhoid is of two kinds as follows: one is when they are between the buttocks, shaped like a woman's figure, where it has hair, and sometimes blocks the urine.  And the other kind is in women, and it is on the perineum like a rod with two buttocks.  And the treatment for men and women is that you cauterize all the affected areas, and treat them as other wounds; in the second case, of those from whom the urine jumps through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tendonitis
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendonitis is an affected area on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tendonitis from your hand or fingers, and treat it lightly; and don't apply too much pressure, lest the blood does not flow, then the treatment will be ineffective; and there is another affected area that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and swells, and by chance becomes feverish, and resembles a cow's disease, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow's disease". It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said for tendonitis, and treat it until it is healthy.
de erratique	of cauterization
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come into the marrow, such as cancer and abscesses that pierce and herpes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that comes into the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe how the abscesses are affected at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hesitate to pierce, but make a small incision while the pain is alleviated; and then seat the patient on .i. stool, and have .ij. small stools or he leans against them, and supports himself on his back and joins his feet as far apart as the width of the leg; and let his thighs be expanded, and place his arms below his knees, and bind them well with a linen thread; then suck out the pus from the deepest part of the marrow, so that its form appears; and it is necessary that when you have sucked out this instrument, that you make a small incision at first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further in than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapauls, so that the instruments do not hurt; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand, it is necessary to cover at the top, with a spatula or a small spoon; and when the pus is evacuated, it is necessary that you put tents moistened with rose oil or green oil into the wound, and place the tent above the wound at the depth of the marrow, and put below the marrow and on the smooth skin a net of moistened linen threads; then cure after .ij. days of anointing, until it is healthy; and many times lift up the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristologe so that they are cured; then return to the anointing. And if the wound is repeated in the marrow, it is necessary that you beware of cauterizing with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Here is the translation:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the issue of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant stands on its feet, if it needs to be supported from above;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When he jumps just as the joints, if he instructs to grasp, and makes him steady with condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps far, then God wants it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump far as we have said, then he turns a little and a little, until he is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of alum, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush everything into a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the natural place of the woman within and remove this joint,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in warm water up to the loins;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened below, make her a belt of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make them sit on the seat, then make them lean back and hold their mouth and nose, and take a light hold of their belly, for they swoon now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if I place my hands on it little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported onto his neck, and let the feet hang down, and sit beside the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he places his hands little by little, and then he takes his hands on the belly, and he lifts the cushions from below, until it is arranged downwards;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if it does not fit, take his feet and shape them properly, then shape the belly upwards, then he puts his hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold of it as much as the child needs.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child who comes with a large hand meanwhile
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	One must learn to reset the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot reset it, then make the woman rise and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and flex her legs forcibly;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then massage the muscle that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not become swollen, make it sit on a chair, then study how to move the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and guide the child according to their natural posture, and make them stretch, and instruct them to take hold as much as the veins are loose.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the exit of the child on their neck, and they have spread out their hands, and their face is turned towards their mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that you should hold your hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the secondary ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to be in this manner for all the secondary ones, then cut the secondary one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the top of the swelling, so that it is not retained, and kills the infant;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it fits, and instruct the woman to take hold of it at no time:
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be easier to deliver.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Here is the translation:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live, if they receive a name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the belly.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and no time do they issue naturally like all those below, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle vein be, and make it thick and light in its doing.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as he values his health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six, or many up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is evident that the wise one knows all this, for it seems by chance that these things have happened;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if one does according to what is suitable.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman who has had a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is suitable that you know the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife hold the sheet of skin with two hands, or she be tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart during the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with oily moistures made from altaea and fenugreek, and sown with flaxseed, then anoint her belly with these oils and muskilles.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then insert them lightly into the mother, then choose the suitable place where she inserts the fingers that are convenient for her to do so.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take heed that the veins are prepared so they descend upon their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you prick the tonsils in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the dislocations are on his feet, prick them or puncture and massage the moist spots;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the tonsil with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently move his whole hand, and prick the tonsil in none of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the void spot;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it's the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then prick against another onion, or the third one you have in hand, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are even in moving from one part to another, so that the juices issue forth, and the onions are held in place by the muscles, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then oil the joint with some of its oily fingers, and bind it in that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it remains pointed, set this anvil or higher up, and do that until it issues forth all its force.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to straining.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must envelop it in a bandage, so that it issues forth completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the cupping on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and similarly with the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the joint, or it has an acute assembled head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	it is necessary that you place the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and extract the acute angle;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you round it to the instrument called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in the same way make the infants have a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat for the bones as for the ligaments,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head jumps forward and it holds to the strength, if it is broken, so long as the moisture that is or worse comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it by pieces in the muscles where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as far as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the veins are on their feet, it is a light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the marrow are light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or in the chest, it is necessary that you extract it with a drapery enveloping the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and open the belly or the chest, as much as the moisture that is there corrodes.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limbs are dislocated, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If you thrust your hand deep into the marrow, and pull it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then you thrust a finger or two, and pull strongly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then you must not trouble it;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then you must handle moist and fatty things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the surgeon applies plasters, and it is in watery softening and loosening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then apply what we have said in the living infant.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and so that one has no power, if one draws it out by pieces, and leaves nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then apply what we have said in abscesses that come from the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the flow of blood comes, it should be stopped by tightening, and one should try other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension, he came to have abscesses in the bowel, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and let the woman hold the lancet steadily for a short time, and thus she will make a little hole in the skin;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the thigh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one adds the books; and at 10 turns as 10 heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every way, the tips should be more subtle of the restraints, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the shaft be of a large tree, and the margin of the trees should be thus, and one palm and a half in length.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and within the same measurements, let the adjustments of this same shaft be firm, closed at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and this adjustment is placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the same horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar in appearance but more subtle and lighter, should be made from wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two joints, if you see, a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see open the marrow to the entire instrument, then make the woman sit on a seat, her feet hanging and her legs covered;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then you should put your hand on the entire instrument, as you have done to the tendons evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until the boil does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have been prepared, so much more hasty is the work, and higher are the homes according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in the enfantement, then you must command the patient to retake his wing, and then the fait is discerned of conditi, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let it jump through that, it's fine.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that doesn't work, take a pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the abscess, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomille, cassialigne, and centaurie.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cloth or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the abscess.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it steep until the vapors come out of the abscess; then make it settle, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary inflammation hurries.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not a fever, then instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or in a mixture of alta, and then apply the poultice to the affected area.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek the secondary; and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not break during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; if it comes and disentangles itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted, we have said the treatment of sternution, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not consist of all that we have said, so be careful that you do not fall into error;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the womb of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment of tetrafarmaçon;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if the pores open and close again, and come forth fiercely; but however, when it pours out in this way, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument is for when one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, it is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen as similar to a dog, and put the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tincture as long as it is exhausted, and begin another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, then it is obscured by subtle signs.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary therefore to put the finger on it so that he feels it with his finger, and does not touch it with spatula or ague, and makes the ligature so it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the affected limb a warm wine and oil compress, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put or apply a plaster of pounded herbs, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes these sudden swellings of wounds or abscesses come; if it is necessary to drain the sudden swelling: if it is treated, as we have said about the treatment of a swollen pimple.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the fundament are swollen, and those that come from beneath the fundament are painful, or in the space of the aforementioned parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is a fistula or more; and when that swelling is ancient, it has worked, and has moistened the white or subtle wound.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these are fistulous abscesses; and they are recognized by the fact that there is inflammation or swelling when the patient makes an effort, and by chance one jumps towards it.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod, and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fistula that penetrates to the foundation, and does not penetrate further.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if he has twistedness, if you apply a subtle layer of plant material, or horse hair, until you feel the layer or the hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with gentle pertussis or windy verbosity or truth, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate deeply; if you hasten to cure quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is near the bladder or near the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and it cannot be treated with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, it is the stretched vein coming up to the place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that he has immediately bowed, and there is no medication nor sudden healing by anointing.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except through work, and the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips bent towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a tent of iron, or of lead if it has twistedness, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you feel then that the tenderness has been perceived; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can hardly heal all at once, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is a subtle fire cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the entire hot iron in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized places are burned, which resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of many wounds in a bruise, as long as that flesh is swollen, then the treatment of joint dislocation by softening and strengthening.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is thus healthy, it's good. If this one cannot be otherwise healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not prick except to the finger which is at the bottom, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the wound;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut again before holding, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and it will be freed from the holding, and will fall away; then I will show you those withered skin flakes that resemble a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound is failing to heal, and becomes short between you and the joint, then cauterize it with fire or medicated water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauterizes assemble in this way: it is to know, the drying of these joinedchars, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen limbs in mud or in broken crocks, as long as the joints throw out pus, and it issues forth from the joined chars into the crock.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the fingers suddenly with a hard dry medicine, and these are the dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes almost to the deep foundation, and is separated from the body, you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the cloth or the siphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no others that way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut almost to the bottom, or if you can put tenses and cures as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far in depth, that you do not touch the tendon which holds the foundation, and come gently with the senses willing to guide;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you separate that covering and the bundle then that it is touched by the foundation, or by tension or by another appointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I will define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that undermines the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the bottom of the foundation beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is stuck in the margin of the deep wound, then extract the thread of that pierced one, so that you stop your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the joints together, and hold one to the other, and let it be so for a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it back many times, until the threads seize the flesh that is between the two, and cicatrize.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound so that it becomes whole and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pass through, then make it pass through in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it does not fit to do for the copper setting if they perforate, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine-like instrument which they make into a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and not on the other part, because one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Here is the translation:
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or several, they are lacking foundation and at the bottom of the foundation; but those that are lacking have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and yet they have a bit of citrine water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a chamber bed, as long as the foundations issue forth, and they appear as threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and bend it as in shackles, or hold it to your finger, then cut into its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them back with their moisture, take them at the drapil, or at the couton, or with a piece of camlet cloth.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and stretch them to your fingers, then grasp them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then heal them with other treatments until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient with a cleansing cluster that bites and is harsh to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can issue openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When the patient prepares themselves, and their vein is far from the foundation, it is a light cure;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them to your finger or nails, and you touch, then you treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you thread the vein in this manner: take a twisted vein, and put it on a needle, and then draw the vein above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the vein below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too large; and hold the vein firmly, then knot the vein, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one open to correct the excess of blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put on the foundation a small cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let them sleep as much as they wish, and when they have slept, if you apply treatments of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	due to excessive dryness of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you make an incision at the tip of a spatula or on your finger nail above, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it as soon as it is swollen thus as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be soothed, then recommence the rubbing more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and is scarified.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it as soon as it is healthy.
dou fremit	do rubbing
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small, false appearance that goes under the body, and goes much in depth;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it just like death from rubbing, and it comes into the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a thread of an owl's feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and place that thread on the rubbing, so that the circles thoroughly encircle the entire rubbing.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand to the entire vein as you feel everything around the finger, and put it in front, and scrape the finger from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper in this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, because you must hold it at the finger, and press; And if you see, then cauterize the finger, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of tin foil or maillet; and never make any of these small and large instruments, according to those which are at hand.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then, which are used in the treatment of children who are fragile and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there is a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived within; and it has on one side a perforation, and on the other side a perforation.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it be the belly or womb where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and it be pierced all around with small holes,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and have between each hole a space of a thumb's width, then insert into these holes a strong thread made from twisted flax or hemp, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that's the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then insert it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the servant holds his two hands together, so that they are completely visible, then extract the cluster, and lift the patient's legs at the partition,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he takes the medicine as it is issued, so much as he can; and if he sleeps a night completely, it is more great aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer a clyster for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to be issued, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, so let the clyster be as subtle as for an infant.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of a subtle clyster on whom the skin is held back:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about manual and medical treatments, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is a sign of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the aposteme's heat: if it makes the cephalic membrane sick at once, as soon as blood comes from the wound, and let the healthy part be contrary to the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to recover, let his food be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, a poultice of hot oil, or cotton soaked in rose oil soothingly, or in wine stippled.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little about later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he arms are numb, if you put them on some joints, so they may be healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's blow and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if you assemble them by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is discovered to be bone-deep and painful, and does not hold but for a little, if you cut; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, like tested and roasted meat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a wound that has become putrid, and it does not adhere to the bone, so cut around the entire putrid area, and throw away, then cure.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has formed an artery in the wound or vein, which lacks a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in this way that the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take incense in one part; blood of dragon .ii. parts; quicksilver .iii. parts, and subtly grind the powder,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and let it sit without loosening, so it does not become inflamed; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no time is spent on quenching the thirst with quicksilver, when one does not have incense or the blood of dragon, but rather the arsenic has not touched the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved to the wound, especially in this case, if you don't put some of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but instead put on some digested ointments, or poultices made from water and honey, until it drips through.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with other remedies until he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then remove it with subtle pincers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soothing, as you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in warm water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other remedies of mine according to this method, and apply moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce or open it lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is his trade.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduit is guarded, because that's where the blood goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the jugular vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and let it rest for some days, then heal the wounds of the joints until they are healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be careful and adjust the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a spear or a dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow from a spear or a dagger, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has become putrid, because you will know then that the patient is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply,
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and inspect the body, and look at the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put attraction in the affected place, and apply it several times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have attraction, then put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound several days, or two, or three, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm coming, nor evil trembling of heart which are not tokens of anguish;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the hand then with tents and other cures, so that it may be healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and becomes an ulcer, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is done as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, if the treatment of that which is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has seized pieces, thus cauterize the wound, and remove foreign bodies if they are dislodged;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislodged, let the wound putrefy, thus lighten the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds in other limbs, the judgments are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Here is the translation:
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and many and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound often bursts the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the intrusion from outside;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more troublesome, and often a small wound is worse than a large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because when we replace the intestines in, we do not put them back in order, from hot to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return to points,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because of this, it is necessary to treat the inner wound, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common fractures often occur in the fracture of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the fracture of other wounds of the body and other proper fractures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are more suitable with the bandage of the belly, and I will specify each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestines are outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and grievous thing is to replace, this is by one of the ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	where the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	because of this the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is frosty, warm it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak a sponge or a cloth in hot water and apply it gently,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you cook in hot water steeping and macerating and soaking,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine as much as the swelling is reduced;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and many times they make these restraining vines, and it is necessary that they be loosened by unswelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or wine and evil humors are cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for it is aligned to the entrance of the body by a small amount;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument with which one collects the blood clots;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to remove what is superfluous in size,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut without great necessity that it be;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut deeply into the curve and do not dig further, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper location,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	see if you can put it in power, for that is worth miracles.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is on the lower part beneath the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If you set the head and the foot higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parties
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you set it straight so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus you must manage it as I say in great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Small wounds heal quickly when they are well-dressed.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then put it between your hands, I mean minister carefully, you should hold the entire bandage in your hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common way of suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then let the head of the wound be, I give a space, and I fix a needle or it has, I have a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and prick the two heads of skin with the two heads of the suture,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and gather the four chief veins which siphon the humors; ensemble;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain through a double thread twisted around the needle of the vein, part by part,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather the four heads of the wounds approaching,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let the two fingers of the span, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then thread the second filament as you did the first needle
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease from doing that according to what you have mastery of the needles
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wounds are closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the subtle needles penetrate all the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary that they be tempered;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not penetrate and open up the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the heads of the veins, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I hold taut or wrapped around the heads of the veins to keep them steady,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because he suffers from a needle or an ulceration.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second wound is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you gather the ulcers of the skin and the ulcers of the flesh together into a needle or where there is a strong moist filament;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these wounds all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch follows the bone,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that one had on the belly or stomach,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a razor,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's width large,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was nine palm's widths of intestine,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I restore the intestine then when it has been 23 hours without food.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not heal him with ointments, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a remedy more on the wound with much cotton frequently in the day, and wash it with honey water until he is healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and sew up the part that is deficient just up to the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart in the right direction, if you have sewn up the head of the suture or stitched or you have placed the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and let them pierce from another part of the inner side up to that defect;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew thus as the furrier makes the pelts,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and let one side of the suture remain for a while, and take it up again from another side, until the treatment is fully accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of treatment, which Galen properly described,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is thus as a certain spring, which naturally assembles the injured parts together.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and applies one head to the other head, in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	fix a needle or head of a probe close by, and make it pierce the limb slightly,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the injured heads settle;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce the weak part just up to the dent inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as it reaches the head of the swelling;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and the other of the weak part just up to the dent inside, in the other heads of the swelling that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst way of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Here is the translation:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must cauterize the belly with two needles, or it has thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is a suture more grievous than other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus the art has moved,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder irritating flesh,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and the art has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and they inject the filament, and are sewn up the suture, and the scar.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound like the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, cotton much,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and remove it several times a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of other medicine in many conditions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary to apply a light ointment of tempered heat, or in a rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the joints, and beneath the spines;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if they feel pain or decay in the belly, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they are given a cluster of black wine immediately, and meanwhile the decay reaches just up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is through the plant of the veins that they are, and through the subtlety of the whole body, and the approaching of its natural strength.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound's suture breaks, set it back as it was when the intestine is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and becomes black or dark, then you must lay the black lead that removes blood which does not come from life,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then touch what is between the eyebrows,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the fingers pendant from the part below the wound up to the furthest point to ease the extraction when the nerves are cut, and the wound is swollen.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one cannot restore it in some homes,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was pierced or wounded by a spear in his belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus blocked the evacuation and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I will translate the sentence:
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sweating, I doubted that the patient had a bad condition in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no point of pain, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take firm stitches with large threads, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the patient has opened their mouth, if they place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if they stretch their mouth upwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then they grasp the head, and it holds so that it cannot dislocate,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then place another finger afterwards in the same way as before, so that the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head gets stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this gut thread so it is well unravelled,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then attach it to the head of this thread, namely a subtly twisted flax thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then put the thread on the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching up the intestines is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, if there is no ingenious remedy, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and especially when it is split and torn apart.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And fistula is according to the true nodulation of hard and white, where one does not feel pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it bursts out clear pus, and other times it thickens;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes a little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have already spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not clean, and there is flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not outside except by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, through the small passage of blood or course;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	where for this reason he has hard flesh within, and on the lips, that he does not let it grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where he has too much of a bump;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the skin is porous, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	for this reason that the corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	because the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in sanitation, and is weakened by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula has in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	where the spine of the back, or where a joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it is a part that comes to the property of the principal member, and similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula that does not approach exactly to the place I have said, and you are confident of the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you examine the view, if you take a straight tent of iron or steel, so the fistula is upright, so the quarter;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the leads bend into the twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search well by tents,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if he is treated with a clyster through one of the passages,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows from one passage to another, and it becomes cloudy;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should carefully examine your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is shaved away at the front,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I told you, if the wound follows what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the false growth and the rotten flesh that is within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat it until it is healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well perforated in the right spot, then it is necessary that you cut around it, as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I put threads moistened with medicine in a liquid state, and the ends just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the excess flesh which is remaining at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments on the healthy skin, so that it may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if he is not healthy through that, then cauterize as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut around it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is injured in principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it so that the corruption is entirely removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment of things which are inflamed so much that they become healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and returns to its natural state as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not a liar just up to the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it uncovers and searches as much as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all corruption, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with an instrument suited to that,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, so remove them all, do not leave a single one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture makes you do the opposite, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot open them for an hour, then apply to the wound something producing pus.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the abscess is ripe around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have less difficulty with the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you remove so much of the corruption as the blackness is all gone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corrupted flesh, and it comes just to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if you want to heal and cover everything up to the corruption, and then cure it as much as it is swollen;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you take an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of around thirty years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came inside the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	so that the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove the cause by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the mirror shows by their foolish pride as much as the abscesses open.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they corrupt many materials, and become fistula, and they come from many holes that all flow with moisture and humidity of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many mirrors show a cure within twenty years, and there is no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which corrodes through the openings to a large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrus color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I probed a tent in one of these openings, and then sought out all the openings,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that one vein came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings as much as I discovered a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I seized upon that which appeared to me as corrupted bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied in a long sequence, and could not solder.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I re-examine, and discover the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continued corruption in the bone, and the ulceration, and then I treated it, and thought to reset the joint;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do so much that I seized upon a part of the bone, and pulled it out with all its mass,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and it was healthy and sound immediately,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it does not allow to restart the work because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot suffer,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for the fear of death that I have of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the evacuation of blood is often excessive, but it was completely healthy,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither to the wing nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take the ligature, and hold it at the head of the bone that is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct him to extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another ligature of a thicker thread than the first ligature, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stand upright, if you treat the corrupted flesh at the bottom,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the wound where you see swelling, so that the serum does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and apply a hot iron or a cupping glass below the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and thus it is necessary to swell as one can see and feel the corruption, and to swell again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear nice, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if it discovers the flesh entirely; then put the fire underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then let one part be purified by the other, the corrupted area, and let the purification occur from the length of the corrupted area, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and purify the bone or where it touches another part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the injured joints, there is no other anguish than to cover twice;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is a prick in the hand or a prick of the foot, it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but however it behooves you to inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and the mondification in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve does not make counter to you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and it is known that the incisors and the wisdom teeth, which cover these bones, are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the mouth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and because of this it is necessary to prepare each similar aspect of the work with his instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and it is known that the work will show you the instrument about which you will have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art;
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the manners of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument with which you will operate according to what is convenient for it.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The heads burst out or because of inwardness, or because of fervor;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have applied medicine to corrode through treatment with medicines, it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	if it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes death through this, or through evil, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and prick afterwards at the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and take by all the body; if you hasten to cover,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, then cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, if the cope reaches the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, if the cope reaches the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it does not matter less remedies that the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and all thus done when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes to the first joint, then the cope reaches after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, so treat all the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up into the leg, so treat at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to treat or soothe the limb is that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one of the tendons downwards, and another minister the other tendon upwards,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you dissect the flesh that is between the two tendons at a spacious interval, so that the bone becomes uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cover or sew, and apply a layer of linen cloth to each part, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy flesh,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess to be treated.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the limb hastily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that he had a similar case in his own foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a blackness which seemed to be certain of fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion went first into his finger by the toe, so much that it took over the whole toe;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate the toe, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the corrosion returned in his hand, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put him on rebounding things after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it seems that I touched his hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to rebound the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would not die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the veins of the man were feeble; and he despaired all, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he stopped his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not seen it happen otherwise except when one does another task, so one has need of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an abscess come on a clear skin, and it stays for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they break and burst, and the pus jumps out, and the veins become empty, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin which is above is also as subtle as the draped delicate.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and does not touch near the bone, nor near the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone in the front, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and you should cure it by cutting all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like one dresses a wound;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not hesitate because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you find that the wounds are growing worse, and the corruption is not on the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the wound is deep in the flesh, so the treatment with a cluster should be like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Observe if the wounds are large, and the abscess which is in them is of foul odor.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then theclysterization of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take aisil, and oil, and litharge, in equal measure, and put copper into the vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and thickens as much as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and make it into a thin stream and in honey
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine sit for two hours, then extract it by expressing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wound is made whole, and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then boil, and cleanse with it, until you know that the wounds are well purified;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If they clysterize with water and honey or if they have a bit of liquid litharge broth;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you clysterize with honey and mild wine, which has the properties of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if one cauterizes what makes the flesh grow in them,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cauterize with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatise on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the pierced area of the sinew is small, and the canal of the cauterized area cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If you enlarge a wound with an iron, and put there a tent of Egyptian ointment.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or ointment of balsam, so that it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then sew and let it heal thusly, or the cluster may enter afterwards.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the perforation that throws below is above, then cut around or lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in a state of fullness, do not let it burst forth suddenly;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot conceal the shame that is beneath, as you wish,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	it appears in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bowel is full, do not let it burst forth suddenly
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound beneath thus as you saw,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	it appears in such a manner: that the bowel falls lightly downwards, and leaves nothing of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stretch over it a drapery of linen that covers the whole wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then apply force directly to the hole of the breast, which is a little larger at first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then they are joined softly upon it, another dressing according to the quantity of the hole,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the hole of the breast to adjust the swelling, and do not remove the large dressing until after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the hole of the breast, removes it frequently to reduce the swelling,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what runs from the bowel, whether it's venom or a little or enough, or digestive, or not digestive;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed of the patients who feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a way and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender part of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts are hurt, and approach the health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then he dislocates it in the morning, or the third day, and when you delay the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change to another dressing, and renew the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the wounds gape open indented after many days, know that the wounds have not closed yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if you come to subtle shortness of breath after long tension, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because the saints approach. Because there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and it is a sign of indigestion if the belly swells above the umbilical area after many days, which means that the guts are not functioning properly;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the guts take time to digest, and it is sluggish, then you should add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as if it were a dialectical remedy, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last resort medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Here is the translation:
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then apply the confection and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked thick.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when we do not find any presence,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then glue it to the dressing, and it stands on the wound, and no one administers it according to the rules of a long Aristologist;
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the celestial body, which is also like a ferryman of voices and hundred.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or at the foot, or which happens to grow in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if it becomes a festering abscess.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and pour pus as far as the root of the nail, and by chance they corrupt the whole;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come the ulcers up to the bone, so that they bring foul pain, and it is the head of two long fingers, and the color is dark brown.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	if it is necessary to cut for you the entire superfluity which remains on the finger,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterizers are of great aid if the bone is sound, and the finger is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the finger presses on the flesh inside, and it begins to point, and becomes white,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it is necessary that you put the right treatment under the ankle which does not touch the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the swelling above, and touch the subtle and light flesh,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply to the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the joints so that they may be healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, so scrape, and draw forth fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted it is, if it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the finger corrupting, so scrape in the same way as I have said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal it until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is festering, and swollen, and it feels great pain, so it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the corner of the thumb, which is excessively thick when cutting across.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is beneath the thumb, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then apply something to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two joints that grow in the hands of some men by chance are entirely numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance they have a part where there is a bone, and sometimes they have a fingernail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them grows in the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that grow on some node of the finger do not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who are born with a thick finger, by chance it moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one who is lean is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or ought to have a new nail, it is necessary that you first shape the round flesh up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then shape the bone to a suitable joint for that, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come together in two ways arise from birth, or from the suddenness of a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you shape that joint, so that the finger restores itself according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tender tents or soft drapery moistened with rose oil, so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of thin lead, as long as the joint is swollen, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Stick them to one of these two with the palm, if you find that joint suitable as it is necessary.
Des vils	Of veins
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	You have thick veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come from many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they are more abundant in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil plant.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they are taken by cupping, and then the black blood is drawn out;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another manner is that you lift the vein, and pull it out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision should be made in this manner: first raise the leg high with a hot compress very strongly, so that the large vein is subtitled.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg of the patient downwards from the hip to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then release and draw the black blood from one vein to another, from one head to the other, as much as the patient's strength allows, like the virtue of the patient can suffer.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the vein, and command that it be tied with black thread in a circular manner;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and restart the evacuation and the blood-letting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of the limb are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then put him in a bath, and the thigh of warm water rises as it turns red, and inflates the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the area of the vein from the top of the thigh to the knee, or in the part below the joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then apply the treatment beneath, as long as it is elevated above the skin, and then place it on the slightly concave area
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cover it in another way, with two bandages; then strip the skin above the vein as much as it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it to the bone, as you have done, and place it on another concave area, as you had done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cover with another bandage, or more if you have mastery of it, then lift it, and cover the toes of the foot
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then burn with fire up to the second joint; then extract at the joint, as long as it is entirely bare, then the scab.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot burn and lift, if you thrust a strong double-threaded needle everywhere.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and burn and cauterize, and you thrust underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it is sufficient;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that it does not form a scab, for if it forms a scab, you cannot burn or lift, and it brings harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have treated it all, place on the spot of the painful wound a moist linen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the veins are constricted and twisted and entwined together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it was subtle, if it seized the vein, but so large as we have said, and this is the form.
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is engendered in legs, in warm parts where there grows no herbs nor tree, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance grows another part than in legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body of snakes and worms, you should distinguish between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are if it comes into the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the veins change, and the vein begins to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth about one and a half inches to the joint, and the nail.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the splint remain on the leg, and every time it is not on the fracture, if the swelling envelops around the splint, and the tumor;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely removed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with five incisions of a hand's length, or ten.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and a man came to me, at whose hand it issued for ten inches in length, and when you cut it, if you prick or pierce, and penetrate just to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	if all of it issues out; and let the material that is inside be emptied, and mix in the medicine that is given in a poultice to produce no pus for a day, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein runs into the marrow of the foot, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there comes much of perforations, and where it jumps veins; heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and feel well along the length of the limb from limb to limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and bursts forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is engendered by putridity of certain humors, if they come forth as worms and snakes and lice and roundworms or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see a patient who is wounded and troubled, if one cannot cure him quickly when he goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	it is necessary then that you bind the limb above and below with a strong well-stretched bandage,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the arm falls, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that he causes, if it is that he corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or growing near the eye, hold the eyelid firmly in place, then cut above, and extract it completely;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient's purification of bodily medications with dissolving medicines for the bad humidors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of rotten foods that cause putridity.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then it moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and afterwards, he raises his eyes as if a worm is at his shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more stiff than anything, as if alive silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departs from that place, and fixes itself in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I instruct him to turn it back again within the body, as I see it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how it moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had not seen it myself, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because it appears that the wind constrains it;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I do not appear to follow this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this illness, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If you place it above and below quickly, and then apply pressure so that this wind constrains the blood to flow there;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those who expel wind, as if they were filthy pills, and pills of serpent's grease, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they settle.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is that there are some with large heads, and small ones, and notched, and hollowed.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have jagged edges, and of those which have lengths, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which settles in no member settles according to various methods: whether in a principal member it notches,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	if head, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls into none of these places, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when you see bad signs and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the signs of the head when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, and suddenly the swelling falls which is on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there is scoptoma and numbness and reversal and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perplexity of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and suddenly there is a white moist scar like a pustule, and suddenly also as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this is a visible sign, you will take care of it, and treat the arrow wound so it does not get infected.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow wound when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow wound changes like the pulse, and in a short time there is black blood, and it becomes cold and sweating cold, and fainting occurs.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you will know without doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow wound that does not heal is that without pus from the abscess, it bursts out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe deeply and seek fresh air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow head remains in the covering of the bladder, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and breathing difficulty; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow head falls into the stomach, perhaps it bursts out of the wound with some undigested food matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow head falls into the belly, and it bursts out of the intestine through a rupture, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because I did something else.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man whose arrowhead fell or was removed from the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touch it, and I pull from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without sensation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pull at a game a shaft that falls into the fat of the eye beneath the parchment beneath,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the shaft was replaced, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the hollow,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was the large shaft of a Turkish bow, all that is to say, light iron without ears; the game was without sensation, and no evil accidents came to me.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And pull a arrowhead from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrowhead at the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I softened the barbs, and subtly worked on it until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And pulled an arrowhead from a man's body, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after it had passed thirty days, it did not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and treated the wound with fire, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow fell or dropped, and the wound was sewn up on;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and delays the arrow within him, and does not change his natural disposition,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And it is seen with another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he suffered great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And an arrow was extracted from the man of the king's prince, which had been shot into his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the treatment after it had fallen for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a sharp pain and soreness beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the loathsome place a digestive attrahent plaster, because the loins do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appears to me that the loins are wounded.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster morning and evening, and resolve the wound itself, and thus the patient remains long times,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he feels the wound; that is to say, a day within his nest; and it tells me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wounded place medicine as a corrosive by gentle touches, so long as it was uncovered,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck to the bone;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted in the opening of the wound by that corrosive medicine, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it passed well beyond the deadline within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I will reset if the wound that I have touched with the tongs, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease from subtleying and ingeniously contriving devices, until I grasped it with the well-made tongs.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, so that I may transport it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything in.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare well very difficult things, and on what is present and failing.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed, but according to seven modes.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the soil where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth there where it enters, it is an arrow entering the flesh, and it does not jump forth at all now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be so that the flesh is pierced inward, and the issue is alleviated.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot issue, if you let it be for some days, and it will move a little each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if you pierce everywhere around it with a subtle iron, as much as the bone around is enlarged, and then pull it through.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: if you do not pull it out, but let it be until it is even after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because the vein comes just up to the skin, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the vein does not supply fuel to the bone sufficiently, and does not come just up to the skin,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains some days without bad accident, if the engine of the pulling is good.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very supplied thus and cannot issue forth, then I will minister thereupon, as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, if it seeks to have the whole tension;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if it draws to no suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot for the narrowness of the wound, and for the deepness of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve, if it forms as much as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and draw back the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that hold it,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the flesh which is stuck to the arrow is pierced through by the muscles that you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can draw it back;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow, but rather draw it back more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, if you let it until the joints are fully relaxed, then pull, for the extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you do the opposite, if you remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision of the tender nerve and of the vein, and put ingenuity into how you can safely extract the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether it is straight or crooked, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell on him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then set according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is inflamed in that place if one sees or feels apparently.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut then so that the tongs can take hold, and then extract it: if it does not come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot issue, let her rest again, and then resume the extraction until it issues forth.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is the remainder of the arrow that is there, remove all of the shaft.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the shaft is broken, and you want to administer a remedy, if it is administered with an instrument that cuts.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then remove forth.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the vein is shaved, he should thrust the instrument to a point entering in, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the vein is touched, it is necessary that you take hold of all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it closes.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the vein is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can take hold of it above, then he takes hold.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and you beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then it stops, and then sews up the wound, if it is necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the swelling is similar to a bird's claw,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to swell at the point of the arrow, as if it were the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tendons for swelling and for shrinking, that is it:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Here is the translation:
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	It is to know: it is about the nodes that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the nodes arteries that are in the temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the eyebrows of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the injured joints which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic, and it is the left side of the head, and people commonly call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the vein called "faste" is composed of the cephalic and basilic;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side;
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is located on the pubic area;
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is that one which one bleeds, which appears clearly on the skin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little vein is the one that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and if it rains on them;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left thigh,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second sophipne which is at the ankle of the right thigh; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catheters and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are rough with a cloth; then the patient tightens his neck to a view,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the veins appear behind the ears, in the place depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the ducts reach to your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above all the vein in length,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein properly, you must traverse two ducts, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then hold steady and bind, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an old one,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and swelling, and accustomed optometry, and at the course of the bitter tears as the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the healer is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then sign of an inch;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then raise the heart towards the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and elevate the vein high up, and the cupping, just as you have done with other veins, and correct the flow of blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then lay the patient down, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form a scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic, for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and it is of such quality that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again swollen from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Here is the translation:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck twisting some ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the health, and let the healthy part of the traversal be a little long, a little wide, for there is no spot of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The health of the vein in the nose is worth an ague, and a strong fever, and diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	As it is a migraine and redness that comes to the face, and mainly when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches out his nose to your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a subtle flame long, and insert it into the labial fold in the space that is between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well here, and the blood will now start to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not remove too much skin in depth, and make a correction of the blood according to necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that's the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the two gums helps in the stretching of the wing, and at the beginning of messiness, and many diseases, and to impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the health is that the patient's neck is stretched from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then cleanse the vein of the loin a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then redo another part in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the liver.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver helps with pain in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and toothaches and indigestion.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the liver, and look at its veins, of which one is on the right liver and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they recognize them by that which makes them black, and by that which surrounds them small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you examine the largest of each part, and thus you make the .ij. veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the sanity below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the veins is such that if the patient holds them between their hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks beneath at each side for a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine then one and the other, and do not go too deep in the font, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly examined are healthy according to three methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where I prick all over, I flame the mirror large, or subtle olive oil as if cutting trenches, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it has mastery over opening the veins, which are full of gross blood appearing, and which contain gross blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flame olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the vein to be carefully treated, and that it should be wary of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not be touching the flame, but rather cutting similarly as one cuts a nail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no vein of it, or you sensibly open the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the flame to the anvil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to understand the joint of the injury, it is necessary also that you stretch the arm, so that you touch the joint as much as you understand the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the joint of the wound, and then stretch the arm, and apply the flame to the anvil quietly;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the joint inflamed, for it is of the artery: avoid that then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it's without an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten thou then, and set thy finger on it for a long time, then lift thy finger if the blood is staunched, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus let the arm be, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be on guard against fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched, and it fails thee, and thy medicine is not present, then cut the artery so that it opens, for the head of the veins; and staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fistula of a fist, and make it, and take one of the emunctories and place it well just next to the other;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stauching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small abscess of the wound, and the possession of the ease of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healthiness of the vein in a thousand ways helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that is underneath, and if he does not press too much in front, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it becomes inflamed and the joints become swollen, and by chance he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any houses due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil; and avoid touching the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the muscles, then make it two fingers long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bloodletting of the head helps, which draws blood from the chief, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bloodlet in the flame of olive or in the flame of myrtle, for it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to grieve anything if one fails the first time, and one recommences;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance he inflames the eyes of some men, as it fails at first, but it does not harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, is that health is not diminished unless it is preserved by maintaining good health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the vein section be made on one of the three veins that are at the wrist: namely, the cephalic, basic, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first or third day, after 2 or 3 hours or a day and a half;
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather when need arises by day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines of a gentle cluster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much retained filth, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful putridities from the intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not heal quickly, he who eats too much meat, or is drunk, as long as it is furious, nor dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and becomes worse on the part of the healer after colic passion, and vomiting, and decay of the belly, and multiplication of the habit in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and all this virtue, or through a thing of the arm or of the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then thin out the humors, if the blood is thick, through meat and through drinks and through medicines, if you have a weak liver.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, so that nothing can resist it, to thin out the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you will know of the vein where it is between the third rib, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you will beware that day of work, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be gentle and joyful, and let the surgeons be higher than those whose veins are opened, and rub the arm three or four times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the limb with the hands until the veins swell, and feel it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then soften the sinews with a little warm oil, then place his right hand on the vein beneath the limb a little where he wants to soothe;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not flee and fails to be touched.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as if they were cords on the sinew, and if there are those that are full of windiness;
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If when one puts on the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, it is because the wound is too constricted, for which reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the surface, so the vein does not get inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vein gets inflamed, and the patient's condition worsens, leave it alone for a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	by chance he will come to abscesses ulcers; do not enter or bathe, then recommences the health as it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then close up that perforation immediately to stop all bleeding;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and open it a little hastily, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the health, and put a little of the oil of olive, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this oil the lie that the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same makes a triangle and arch of veins, when one puts it on the limb; if the blood is subtle and separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess, which has often occurred, similarly when it is not healthy unless at that time when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hurry, and put on the limb a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any black or green color, then it does not bother him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some kind of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance occur at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it happens in short time without delay; but the master makes a plaster to harden the spot, then cures with another cure, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little, and to cut across, not to prick.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of health is free from decay of blood and from failure of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives long life or wide life.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to him whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give soft bread porridge with juice of green apples; if he is exhausted, so draw out three or four times the blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, so he eats before health soft bread porridge with musky syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicories, and well-odored syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he falls into health, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef, and subtle, fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and let them use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to clear his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bloodletting, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to clear his arm after the first bloodletting, and it has hardened strongly, should bleed seven hours after the first bloodletting, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Here is the translation:
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you examine all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come into the pulse of the patient.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healer is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not suitable when you loosen the arm, and make blood issue a second time, and the perforation is closed, that you press strongly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, that he extends the arm hastily, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be until it bleeds the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that has congaled around the vein issues forth,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it on the small piece of silk in water, and press on it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed the blood a second time, let it be in that same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the hand because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the finger becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy part now of the crossing, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the perforations be wide, and let them be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if they cannot issue forth, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not put your hand in warm water, for they place it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, if one wants to see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cross the vein, and if you cut it completely across, don't hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't insert too much in the fontanel, for the nerves are very close to the bare skin,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot be opened.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out as much blood as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand on the left side is worth it for the disease of the wrist, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the spleen is worth it for all the diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as with diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain is relieved by warm water, and it pricks into the vein as much as it can bear.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and lay upon the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many roads;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	stricter than a larger canal, or at the ankle, which is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you lay the vein under the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the vein of traversing as in a joint; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the veins cannot issue forth, reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well purged.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the veins are faulty at first, then restart a second time from above a little, because the veins are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make equal the wisdom of one foot with the other;
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic vein are at the junction of the thigh, and their wisdom is worth the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its wisdom is that the patients either bathe or are stretched out above the thigh, and extract three fingers' width while twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you should press on it in all ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then press around the area that opens or gives pain in the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard against the veins.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make it flow as much blood as you see, and then release the bandage, and put on cotton and strap; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The swooping of a cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this cupping without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and cupping which is done by striking and extracting blood is done in 13 locations of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	of whom one is all asleep in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and others in the sides of the neck; and the abscesses beneath the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the abscesses on the shoulders; and the abscesses on the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the abscesses in the arms; and the abscesses in the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cupping glasses of the swollen veins; and the cupping does not draw blood, unless from small scattered veins that are spread throughout the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this one does not become frightened, as one does when making a bloodletting from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all in fire, nor in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is voided.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, if we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each and every tense;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to wait three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose helps with the grief of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it should be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this waiting is in the place of the health of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not suitable for one who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a catharr, because that causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it does not seem to me that the veins are of use, nor those who have or had cold illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often sins, becomes oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little further down due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping on the neck is in lieu of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the constriction of the foot.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and to a swelling, and to repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to poultice, for if it holds too firmly, then there will be obliqueness or stomach pain or heart pain.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings are like the ribs of the spine if they are worth the pains of the head, and optalmia and migraine, and in the straining, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to express his hand in putting, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the returning flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings beneath the chin are worth a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations of the scapulae are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventosations of the hips are worth as much as those of the three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions in the depth, for the flesh is nourished by blood, and knows of its inner veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the back is suitable for hemorrhoids from the bottom, and for diseases of the anus, and it is necessary that the cup be large, and be of copper, so it has the power to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from all over the body, and are suitable for old pains in the kidneys, and in the marrow, and in the bladder, and reset the fluxes; and they are in the place of .ij. sophenes, and of .ij. chevilles, and anyway they restore the body after long use, and bring forth pus in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck moderately, and put it hastily, and remove evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the red and swollen place, and appear the roughness of the blood; then firm, and replace the cuppings, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once softly, and necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike .ij. times: the first time to subtilize the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood drop by drop, then we suffice with a single application.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, then we recommend frequent applications; and if the wound is deep, then we cauterize deeply, and the treatment is such that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you open the veins of oil-based aperture and dissolvent.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this case, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a poultice, of oil of crescence, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on it.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is suitable to wash it after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from aisil, or from water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or from water of brook, or from a decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not think it healthier to apply a cupping glass before bathing, but rather an hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after the cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are melancholic, and if their blood is too bitter and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that they take cold things, such as apples, pomegranates, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat small peas, and meat from a castle, and moist game meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat small peas and little birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he will bleed himself, then he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men triple or muscat before bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The bloodletting cups that are not placed to harm are those that are placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and podagra, and on the stomach and the arm and the legs and the hips, for these limbs do not suffer from being harmed there.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not make them bleed from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we apply them to the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply cupping glasses to the belly and to the bowel to thin out the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it is done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered empty by sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	if it is for painful swellings, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or water in which herbs of proven benefit have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has or is surrounded by the middle of the millet, a small hole, as if to push an awl through.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not blister the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have a probe in the middle of an iron or iron bar, to put a bandage in place,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the old, and for the lean than for the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then apply this cupping glass to the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or oil, and place it in the cupping glass at the crossing of the vein which is in the cupping glass,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the brightness is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then apply it to the limb, and let it be on the perforation that we have mentioned, so that when one views it, the vapor goes out, and one removes the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the limb as formerly, and restart it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the application of cupping, which is administered in disease of pleurisy, to all acute, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of acute, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible.
et c’est li forme:	and that's the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered unless in limbs where one cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar ones.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the uncovering of flesh, as we do with bones, or nails, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the skin is that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without pus, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a bandage on the tender skin, until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the wounds;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and cling, if it is the place or one can put a cupping glass, if he puts it, for it is of great value afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If this does not work, lift the place of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the healthy places are too far from the body of the sinews, thus muddy .i. wrap with a cold water cloth, and put on, so that the sinew is stretched;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the sinew is multiplied, put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galen, and similar things, so that it is stretched;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you apply the hot poultice of heated peas, and let them stay on until they adhere to the skin, it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more material at hand, take other sanicles.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the sanicles do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sanicle issues forth.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see they settle, sprinkle a little of aloe and of silken thread, or of ash, if they will now cling.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, for they did not find anything in the old books, nor did they read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is strange the practice in our land, because I have never found any good there;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and they stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when breaking or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing hinders you entirely, just as weakness of body, or infants, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	where the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and moderate cold joints, it's to know frozen joints, and flesh of birds and of goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any green grassy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, so you do not doubt about hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork of a cow, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment represents muscles and more quickly repairs the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken in hand or reunited according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but it is not a cure, to reset the broken bone, that is, the large tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as if it were before; and do not touch any part of his work, and for this reason one must nourish with thick soups, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Here is the translation:
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if you break with a wound, and break at all a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the reminiscence comes into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and open well by default, and sound to the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can have twistedness, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not matter if you move the limb, but apply the medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it steady subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which goes to the arvolt, and are the injured separated parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not form in this way.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses form there, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are calmed down;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it equal in the muscles so you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is of two parts, or hand, or foot, or if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to a cord and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, reset them by all means in their places in the muscles where you can, and take care that through your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in his hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work on the aposteme abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at rest, so scold the patient well that he does not move it, neither in vigilance nor in sleep, nor in turning, nor in another manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so well-assured that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you guard that it is set straight, so that tortuousness does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, thus arms and fingers and similar: so it is necessary to envelop with subtle and fine bandages;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are large, such as thigh and leg: it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire limb, and hold everything in place equally, so there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then the internal swelling decreases, 3 or 4 times, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little above the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and hold less, so the fracture then separates a little from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a great part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn back again above the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put on it a soothing hot application that reduces the abscess, and removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold it with these straps, and let them be of a moderately large cane's thickness, or of a stick that one makes into a splint, or of palm branches, and arrange them according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the strap which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it needs to be according to the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold steady on the stiles just as you did at the first treatment, then place a thread above it, just as at the first treatment on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too large nor too small, and be of a linen thread;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are large, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that it has less than two fingers' width between each staple.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are wounded by the staples of the stiles after the constriction in their healthy places, then put under them swabs of linen or a piece of parchment, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And beware that it does not suit to strain these broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is large, it does not suit to put these forces before five or six days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that suddenly occurs;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and see here the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that holds as a wall of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg whites, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of the plasterer restoring breakage to many dispositions, and similarly for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to restore bruising and dislocation and twisting: take absinthe and ladanium and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, an ounce; myrrh and aloe, an ounce; alechil, eight ounces; and make into powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, an ounce; myrrh and aloe, eight ounces; acacia, six ounces; Armenian bole, an ounce, and crush well, and mix with water or egg white, and apply the remedy.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of plaster for joints and bones that are dislocated from their places, and alleviates sudden pain, and reduces the size of the bone, and bruising: take new flax, and soft millet in oil cooked over low heat, and apply to the affected area. This plaster does not restore fully, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly soothes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig tree leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make into a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to restore the breakage of the bone and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of veces, one part of each; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with water of coriander moist, or of water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to apply it more forcefully than the first, when a stubborn abscess comes to restoring a limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balusta, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomile, taking one part from all; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocras states in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems according to Galien that one should put on a broken limb, to restore it, warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to apply that is good for a wound and pain: take mugwort and leaves of decapitated omes, or feathers of a bird, and vismalve, and make it equal, and pound, and make an application on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then you disarticulate a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved out of its place; if you do not disarticulate it by hand for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten it, and disarticulate, and remove the splint now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip into water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on a dry linen cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle treatment, and a little of the splint, and do not restrain it so strongly as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses, swelling, and pain and inflammation are all gathered there, and you have the task of cleaning and binding, then restart, just as you did first equal treatment.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb from what we have said, do not delay further than three or four or five or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is felt, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh beneath.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then restrain it more than at first, and the swelling absorbs its moisture, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drier than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Apply the warm water treatment then, every time you reset it, and let it be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Here is the translation:
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breakings are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to the shoulder blade which is beneath the bone, just like a hedge or a post; and for this reason this type of breaking is called "hedge-breaking".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of breaking is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two breakings, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded fracture, or crack, or break of stone, or fall from stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is a wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and because of this it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made or caused by a stone falling, or by a fall, or by similar things, and it makes the piece of bone enter downwards, and it is like when the blacksmiths make them when they strike on the anvils; thus between the bone within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And it happens more to those who have damp heads or bones, as with the head of an infant;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are dislodged, as with these; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of fractures by the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into their nature, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the fracture is known by this: when one discovers the bone, and one feels it with the finger, then the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and stretching, and palpitations, and fever with chills, and eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in more dispositions, if it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a disastrous accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the numbness comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should open the vein before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the vein before the seventh day, lest the vein under the vein be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the ailing head, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more subtle than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess falls, it is aided by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with soft, clean cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the abscess that falls is appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut around the bone to remove, and it is done according to several ways of work: one way is that you cut with a tight, straight cut in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut, a larger one than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of diverse surgical instruments, some being straight and others large, and are pointed, and are made of iron indeed; and work lightly, so you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus you must minister instruments with caution, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the entire body, and should have a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, so you have instruments for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of instruments.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you put an instrument on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then reposition the instrument a little further away, and do so all around, then make incisions in the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you hold, such as pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you restore the apertured bone to its entire former state with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no nails, if they break lightly at the joints; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is what Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the fracture appears, so that when you have discovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this lens-shaped incisor, whose shape is this:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut on one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the web that is beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is rough at the bone, then set the bone lightly, for one sets the bone well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce up to the membrane, and the bone is broken so subtly above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape off the scales with a subtle rasp which you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp before with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its adjustment; and this is a thing that is not easily responded to by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is deep, it is necessary to take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint it with rose oil, and apply it to the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and apply it to the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another thread, and do not constrict it further than until it holds the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme heat is alleviated, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and farina of veal, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and apply it to the wound, and administer again medicines without sharpness or biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and beware that the wound is not too clean, so you do not leave it without ointment, nor do you leave it without assembling a poultice, for when a poultice assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the wound, it becomes necrotic from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no better remedy comes from the medicine that one has applied, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue in the drapet, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with various kinds of treatments that are necessary, so that he may be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no time are broken the three parts of the nail above, or one part by the swelling, for these are three bones; and the cartilage below is not broken, so it does not make a wound or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your little finger or instrument to the nail, and put the breakage inside your finger index, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and beware lest the patient feels pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be straightened to its place, then it is necessary that you set it even at the head of a slightly thick vein.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then make another one alike, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has cooled down, then apply to the head of the nail a bandage of linen threads, for if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply it on one side, the break is there; and let the bandages be as thick as they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that one should soften the bandages in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white and powdered millstone; then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes apply egg whites to the nose instead of bandages, and if there is a swollen drapery within, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient within; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are observing, if you apply cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a little bag of dyacilion.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come out, apply an emplaster made with flour of sixament and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the veins too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the veins is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the congealed blood with suitable instruments, then sew up the fissure, and cure the festering wounds with charcoal, and suddenly, as emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no depth in the veins of any wound, then heal the tendons, and I put canes of lead, so that it may be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken apart, and there is no wound in the forehead, and the break is apart so gently, and it is not broken in two, except for the little fragments within, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently adjust the break within, and hold it with the other hand from above, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two, then it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are moved out of place, or broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put it on the broken jaw, and put on a double layer; and put on the layer a large, well-made staple, or a piece of even, long and broad leather according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made from powder of mill flour with an abundance of egg white or wheatmeal, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or ulcers come, then manage them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the excess bone with suitable instruments for that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, put there suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks many times beforehand, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the strength broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put equal breaks on both sides, so that the form be as it should, and there is no appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have mastery of extending further, set beneath the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the force with effort, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you make equal the break, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the forceps at the defect, because it comes in profundity, so it is necessary that the patient girds around his shoulder, and sets beneath the shoulder a little pillow, and bends the ministers to the shoulder below, until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the break to your hands, and if you find the debris scattered, so it is necessary that you bend over; and draw forth the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess movement, so take one of the incisors that you have; but set beneath the forceps this instrument, to guard against excessive movement.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not a device, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you drew forth the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of a hot abscess, then touch the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the hot abscesses come, then soften with a dressing of rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without injury, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of mill powder and egg whites, and apply light staples, and put a splint underneath, so you have mastery over it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of dressing over the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the staple on the breakage, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy spine, and beneath the ailing spine; and rearrange each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move above the broken bone, if it is rewrapped every day, and when the ligaments are relaxed, if it is restrained;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on his back, and you put when he sleeps a small pillow under his shoulder blade, to raise the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the force by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm at the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the plaster, if you see that it needs repair, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored to the best in twenty-eight days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Although it happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates its joint, and you do not know how to set it right except by touch; if you examine according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millstone with abundant water, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if underneath the splint there are no cavities in any part of the shoulder, so apply this dressing of linen threads, so that the splint is adjusted equally; and then hold it all together with a strong bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the ligature every day; and all the times that it becomes loose, tighten it, and adjust the splint if it is out of place, and soothe the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is accomplished, then remove the dressing, and be sure, for it is not a thing that can be set right lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes beforehand, and not beneath the heart, if they make it thus, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscessed swelling.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the fist
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The fist is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and swelling, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and that feels very bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly arrange to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplasters and stoups of subtle salt, or another light plaster, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes loose, restrain it; and if you see it becoming dislocated, through corrosion or pruritus that comes from the blood, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the emplaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the emplaster, and hold it as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is known that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in the large ones at the back, and inside the chest, and does not bend except because they are cartilaginous; and one feels it well by palpation with the fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you put equal to the fracture, as it is suitable. And then apply a plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain and piercing, just as if from a thorn, because the bone touches the membrane; and there is numbness, and all at once and vomiting of great abundance of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the stomach, in order to soothe the rupture at the weakest point.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not developed.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has developed, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that some of those who put ventouses on the limb, in order to suck out the putrid matter, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the superfluous humors from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they direct that one should cover the limb of a wounded thigh with hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the length within, then it should be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the opening which touches the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open into the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the blood; and then one must cut into the opening, and draw lightly, and then sew up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplasters, until he is healthy. And if abscesses come, then put on dressed bandages soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb; and treat while the limb of those who need to form an abscess, and be guided by feeling underneath the rib where it should, until he is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and little by little it grows; and thus has the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in many dispositions, and if he moves and feels well when one holds the joint steady and firmly, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so apply a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take heed that the feet are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on the back there is swelling and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated onto their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated onto their back and they want to sit, then they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you warm them if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of musk deer, so it may be appeased; then put on one of the comfortable and soothing plasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover on the heart; and remove the bone, then reassemble the .ij. levels of the wound, so it is large, with a bandage, then apply the ointment in January, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kowe", take your pouchet with your left hand, and put it equally with your right hand on your poitrine, then put the plaster and stick it on, so you have mastery; then hold fast, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it so, and remove it, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the hip is fractured, and if it has, there is not a small amount of diminishment in the head; and it makes a dull sound, and declines towards the paralyzed parts, and brings pain to the patient's limb, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, so that you are on the fracture; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is solely at the head, set it in an equal natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is dull and declines inward, make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture can be more apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of cork, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is softened, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the break of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those which are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full plain of moderate grip, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay the joints thus, and bend them upwards, and settle the patient on his seat; then place his broken arm on the beam, until it reaches the joint, and has in the middle a curve of beam, then bend down to some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the fingers on the fracture equally with their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his stool, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold below all the joints, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, then hold the joint below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each of the ministers extends to their part. And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the joint moderately below the joint, and another towards the elbow, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the joint lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the limb, and on the elbow; then put the fracture in place, as it should be, and hold it steady, so that the abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not hold back until seven days, and put a soft compress in a gentle oil and rose oil, so that the abscesses are pacified; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you put the dressing on the break, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and hold steady on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width of space between each splint, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the break twice; then hold steady on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less loose.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the alignment of the splints, and the holding steady, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each joint for nine days, so that no swelling comes to the place, or the nerves do not come to the limb because it is too constricted. If it is aligned, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	Here is the translation:
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that joins the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crosswise on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm at the bottom part towards his hand, or to the ligament, and another ministration at the top. And then put the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is a single disordered part that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then reset it with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur suddenly, glue on a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the dressing subtly, so that the abscesses are alleviated. And then remove the wax, and put on the plaster made of mill powder with abundant egg whites, afterwards set the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be a little stronger and slightly larger than the others; and know that it should have five or six splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in the other; and hold more firmly on the fracture than on another part, and always less in adjusting, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, which is stretched from linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the bandage afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, as if a prick comes to the limb, it is necessary that you irrigate the limb with warm water, so that the pricks are alleviated; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then recommence the strapping, and if the bandages are weakened and the bones disordered, and similar things, adjust them properly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take a ward off the narrowing, it cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, so you must soften it a little, and let some days pass, until the narrowing corrects itself, and then hold it steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days or thereabouts; then he puts his hands on his neck, and his necks are even, and he is wary of movement and degeneration, and sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers that have had few fractures, and it does not come but that it often happens.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the patient be positioned crosswise, and stands straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extends the fingers to the broken bones, and puts them even with the mirrors, so they are well jointed; and apply the plaster and the poultices, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the limb; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the palm of the hand near the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken hand; and then wrap it with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as well as large as the palm of the hand, and wrap it, so it holds as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the linen between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of the two bones, it is the pulsation, set it even, as necessary; and wrap it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the break, and does not move; and if the break is in the other two, like in the index finger or one of the others, set it even, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie them together, holding firmly, or you put on a splint, as a poultice; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the abscess, and heal what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is thus done by reattaching it above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face downwards, then each minister stretches out his limb equally; and it's when the breakage is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the ligaments will be towards the finger, and the other ligaments below the breakage. And also if it's close to the knee, and then the ligaments will be beneath the knee, and then the extension will be downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the treatment is done in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a double bandage .ij. or .iij., and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the nail, and put .i. thread long between the thigh and the leg, from beneath the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place these bandages on the fracture, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the constriction, then start to bind firmly .ij. turns or .iij. on the fracture; and when you go further above the fracture, it constricts less; then take .ij. heads of thread that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and loosen .iij. sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you reach beneath the foot; and the constriction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or inflammation comes, nor any similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then you must extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then you must break the bone, and draw forth; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that it places itself thus, as in the joint and in the arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not close with the patient's illness.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the pulse is restored on the same day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexes.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the gutter of the knee there is often little breaking, but it splits many times. And if it breaks, if it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and it senses a good omen.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as one can; then put on the dressing, and you put a round steel, if you have mastery of it, and hold it steady as it should be, then rehearse all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; then apply to each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "non-muscle", and the other is called "fibula"; and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it appears clearly; and turn underneath. Then bring into extension, and make it even, and lay the splints evenly; but however, it is necessary that the breakage be gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of wood that enclose the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap two layers of bandages above and below, and lay them in the middle, so that at this point the leg does not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers two lengths of wood, and it is of wood, and they put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a splint for the breakage or where there is a wound; and remove each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so heal until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breakage of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and the two po [small bones] are not affected, and it does not happen that they are crushed in several positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the foot breaks, and you see the bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his shin, where the bones are raised, then press them together until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and under the belly of the foot a small tablet at two inches from the heel, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped it with drapery, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any broken fingers, set them right, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that tablet I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in linen drapery, and hold the tablet under the foot; and let it be situated on top of the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, which we have discussed; and attend to each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the breaking of the bone one should prick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the womb is broken, if it makes her sit enlarged, then incline to the back part of the spine, and hold by behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put a large stalk in it; then pull out the woman, and lift up the back little by little, and thus jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the womb, and returns the bone with the stalk; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or eight: if the break will be restored, and you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a cord to the perineum, and blow into the bladder strongly, until the bladder is inflated within: the womb will thus return the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into my book. For the break signifies more dispositions on the right way of restoration: therefore give heed to it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the rod, when it is broken, take a gorge of oil and put it on the rod; then wrap drapels around it, and leave it seven days or eight, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be stabilized now, so that the healthy parts we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol ointment, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, so that abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the skin of the chest, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, at small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not aligned to put in place with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary in the mirror that it takes 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so it does not bend under compression on the limb at your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head is placed on the top of the apparent bone; and the bolt is set in place once, so it holds firm, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you take hold of the top of the bone, so the instruments have a grip on it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take hold of it with an instrument suitable for that, whether incision or sewing, at your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone, including rough and minor scars.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so much that it is in its place, then apply a black stippled ointment, and properly if it is established; and do not put anything on the raw wound or anything else where oil has been used, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer this when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it completely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times foolish people have done this, and have caused death or corrosion to come to the patient.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will not come to pass, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, strong bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards a day or two, an improvement in the wound, take away what you had put on everything, and apply gentle ointments to soothe the wounds, as we have said, like soothing tetrafarmation and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two or three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be soothed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowel releases the flow gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot be sutured but releases the bowel again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these deviated pieces that bring that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weakened after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or from a multitude of arousals; or from too great movements, not in its hour; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the arousal is frequent with warm water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member which is twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And often the node is removed by constantly and for a long time rubbing with moist hands. And let the limb be gently moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted part is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be cauterized with iron, so that it covers just up to the bone, in a subtle incision, making gentle touches; and put confidence and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if you must now reset sense targeting.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because delay is involved, if one inflames the limbs, and by chance if one sets them back in their place; for this reason it does not suit to move them at the hour when they are inflamed: often it brings spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Always, when it happens, if you make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the aposteme (abscess) is calmed down; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the cure comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on the dislocations of the limbs from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Here is the translation:
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through better arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers as if from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be deft, to hold equal; and instruct the patient to open their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers set it equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, meanwhile it is the jaws together, if they are raised by warm water and oil, so that they reset lightly; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming soft, if you put on a warm cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many ligatures.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the jaws cannot be set back in place at one time, and are not converted to their joints, then fever and habitual pains come, and by chance a solution of belly, and by chance vomiting pure colic.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is perilous; and many times he who has it dies in eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fracture
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fracture cannot be dislocated from the joint within the continuation of the bone and the skin, and is not dislocated at all in the faintness, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is towards the hip cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does dislocate sometimes, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same way the joint of the spine is reset, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Here is the translation:
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate within the nerves; and often dislocate downwards towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, because for those who have little flesh, the joint hastens to close up; for those who have enough flesh, the joint closes at the points, and returns to the points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they get a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells up with a hot abscess, and one believes it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you examine them, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocations occur when they move downwards towards the joint, and make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the bone to touch the top of the shoulder, as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the bone;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the infant is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers below the bone, and lift the joint with force above to the bone; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it above, placing it below; if it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the master healer shall rise up mollifying and soothing, just like a decoction of alder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and shall be soothed.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be placed on their back, and put a layer of linen cloth underneath, not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror at his heel, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make a support present, namely a home which is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and put the shoulder underneath the linen cloth of the patient, and lift the linen cloth high, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers treat the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick into the ground, so that the head should be just as steady as a pestle, and not too big nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then put it under the patient, but let it have soft drapery above, and the patient should be standing upright on a long stick; then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a stick of three feet long and four fingers wide, which has the head bent to enter into the patient's armpit in front, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Here is the translation:
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that you put under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold it under the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you massage little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more afterwards, five or six days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five or six days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are bruised or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the hands, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another treatment; and cures until they are healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and tardiness in movement, if the patient is bathed many times, so that this stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation which commands
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint which commands is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and likewise before and behind, and the dislocation is not relocated, for one sees well and feels well; and dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crippled, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus, so that the abscesses which come to life, for if they come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset from all to all, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it is thus, so you can bring it back, you extend your hand to his two hands; and his arms are expanded, and the fingers of the mirror according to the count inwards, above and below, and bend the joint at his fingertips together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, strongly administer extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they tighten two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror reaches the joint to his hand, anoint it with no oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint firmly, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, set a dry dressing with a little egg white, and hold the arm firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then disband.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, disband the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the dressing and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then disband.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels gripped after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fatty membrane of a sheep, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the membrane back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, set on a warm, moist, heated poultice with butter, and hold it in place; if it returns to its natural disposition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it must be quickly returned to its place, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess does not develop there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedies are that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and the doctor puts them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Anyway, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick part of his hand on a table at extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the fingers put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then hold the swelling down with soft cloths, and let it settle thus without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the nerves are affected, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to stretch by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is on the place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it be still for a while, then disengage and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no grating, apply the warm water poultice, and rub until it be healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	They are sometimes dislocated at any part of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they stop, and push the dislocation back into its sockets as far as it returns, then hold the top of the arm, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be for a few days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not touch the limb, as we have said, and release the dislocation of that day, and make it mobile, and reposition the limb; and do this frequently, until it is straightened.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same thing, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same thing, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly stop making sense, it cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes numb, or the two hips or the two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the spine changes in four places; the one that changes at the back is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you should recognize that the gilbositez originated in childhood: if there is no point of healing or sanitation from the whole body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or from percussion or from similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak grand words, where it is not much in all great profit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes to the worst before, no one is healthy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his equal bed, and have the support of a strap beneath him, so he does not slip.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place a thick cloth on the ground firmly, and another on the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the sick person's buttocks, and another on the thighs, and on the knees, and on the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two ministers adjust the bandages, one at the head and others at the feet, among the thick cloths.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well fastened, the cloth as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a tube of three inches long, and place it under the patient's skin, and the patient should be on their back, and insert the head of the tube under the patient's skin, then put the middle of the tube on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrors at their feet on the other end of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it so that it turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix three sticks at the head of the patient's arm, and three others at their feet, and have between each stick, above and below, a hand's width of space.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each stick a hole, where the tube turns, and let the sticks be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three sticks have one turning stick, on which the tube turns, and have in two turnings two small sticks of a hand's width long, to turn the tube.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the ligament that is among the tendons turns towards the head, and the other tendon towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its own turning to the entire ligament, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is straightened, put on an emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the staple of a tablet of .iij. two inches long, which grips the limb of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the staple that we mentioned before; and never administer on a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come to the back of the spine behind the ribs, and believe that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have any presumption: by chance it may bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come to dislocations suddenly, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward it slips, and a little dislocates forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the affected knee than the healthy one, and the affected one cannot bend their knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limb that is swollen from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one who comes to the doctor, if it is that this accident is contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who comes beforehand, if it is that they support their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, then it cannot go forward, and it retains its urine, and inflates the groin, and when it goes, then it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who comes behind, if it is that they cannot stretch their knee, nor double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the thigh at the place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this similarity of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that it has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and strengthen it within and without, and move it straight and crooked; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one minister strongly, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with one bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the top of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If that's not so, it's necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, it's necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the joint which is below the angle, then extend the bandage above the angle, and above the strength.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip of the affected limb, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, it's necessary that you bind the four feet of the affected limb together with a strong bandage under the four heels, and under the four knees, so that the affected leg is extended four fingers more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the furrow, the patient feels it, as we have said about one who has gout, and stretches the ligament properly on the affected leg, and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then place a splint between the hips of the patient in the form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and has planted moist cloths around, so that it does not bother the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the doctor puts his hand evenly on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the case of gout, and the patient feels it on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and place the mirrors of pain on the angle of the sick leg, then press with the other hand, and extend below towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the sick leg downwards, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the back, just as we have said about lying on the hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and place the plaster, and tighten with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest .iij. hours or .iiij., then dislocate, and put the poultice on top; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let them be for .iij. hours; then dislocate, and make the patient walk slowly, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee together; and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has well aligned his leg with his hip lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and make the leg align with the hip, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then unbind it; and do not trouble the patient anymore, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not in its place, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes entirely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the sinew is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The resetting is easier, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the entire joint, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him firmly by the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left, two or three times, then hold it high up, and gently pull the foot high up.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do it two or three times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it stays in place, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will stay.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot stay in place like that, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strap firmly in the earth between his thighs, and wrap cloths around it, so that it does not dislocate the limb.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then they will stretch out the thigh, and another minister will extend the foot to his hands or to the knee, so that he lies on the column of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister will stretch out evenly, and the straps will be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches them;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then they will put the mirrors evenly on the dislocation with their hands, and another minister will pull the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, they will put the plaster and bandages on top, and strongly bind them, and tie the foot to the leg, and beware of the veins that are behind the knee, so that the ligaments are not too strained.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then let it be still for three days or four, and hold the bandages tight, then loosen them on the third day or the fourth, and delay informing the patient for three days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks ahead of this deadline, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come to the spot, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the upper or lower back, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until they return.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put the sole of your foot on a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be for two hours, then disengage; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, be wise in the art and do not use it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, not too harsh.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things appeasing hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses will not come to life.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, then administer things appeasing hot abscesses, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of dried herbs.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and it is with dislocation to fracture, and you will not be able to reset, if the bones, and do what we have said about simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	Explain the rule of physics
