O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I will fulfill with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from all in all, so the knowledge is perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in books of old that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery, and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of members, and forms, and conjunctions, and separations thereof, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and their position and the movement and rest of veins, and from what place they arise.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore says Hippocrates that the name with the name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said beforehand, so guards himself lest he err and kill men; thus I have often seen many of those who undertake this science and then abandon their knowledge and experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut out an abscess or boil on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took in charge the leg of a duke from our land which was broken, and with the breakage had an open wound; and the ignorant surgeon strained the break above the wound to the very bones, and did not leave any flesh uncut, and thus left it at a terminus; and he commanded him not to disband it in any way; and so it remained that the leg became completely swollen and the toes came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him and I hurried to come and relieve the leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in any case the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who opened up an abscess that was infected, and then inflamed it by the evil of his authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, does not agree that one touches it with iron unless it is in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galens says in some of his warnings: "Do not take a serious illness to care for, unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have written this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medical cauteries, and it deals with the chapter from head to feet; and the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bandages and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it deals with the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twistings, and similar things; and it deals with the chapter from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some have divided and said that cauterization is great help; and others have said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness; and he who says the opposite says that cauterization does great help in hot and dry diseases that come into men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true at times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, I don't meddle with fires except for one who has tested it and knows by long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the remedies and pace of time; as for other temperaments, we are not afraid, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cauterization together with fire is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater good than burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if there is none.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from member to member approaching, and bring diseases of grievous sanitation to the afflicted member; and by chance, the patient's fever due to its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not do so if there is superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is revealed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say by demonstrating; or receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and selected patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harmful happenings which occur are put below by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary and hastening pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization does not have a relapse; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is not medicine that changes the complexion, nor dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its hastiness of value, and for the virtue of its work and lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterizations administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauteries for dens by pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer modes of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears clearly that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they didn't say this just because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the heat of cauterization does not cause corruption, but it is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some men; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And anyway when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it's burned by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use iron cauterization because we have made it appear suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from top to bottom, so that the view may be clearer to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is worth against moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the top of the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for abundance of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient should be purged by soluble medicine, cleansing the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and custom of the patient can tolerate; and then rinse the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the scale; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let it be where your two middle fingers will come to rest, so that it bleeds a little before you heat the cauterization called "olivare", which is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and do down and out with your hand slowly and carefully as you turn; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone a little small; and if you don't see it, start the cauterization again until you see the bone as I told you; after that, take one spoonful of oil, and put in an awed and soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and leave it three days; after that, put a moist cloth in butter; and leave it until the eschar is removed; after that, cure the wound with ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancient ones said that when an open wound remains longer, it purges more; and therefore it is more helpful.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others say that one should heat the cauterization until it is extremely hot, and pound so hard that it abates from the bone as wide as a thread that women put in their looms for the humors to flow out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that, one should cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except perhaps in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and fruitful for me, and that is what I use to work together in harmony with salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's herbs and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cauterization that we have mentioned before, it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take note if the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that previous cauterization.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, make a cauterization on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cauterization at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and lift your hand so that you do not see quite to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those of the middle part of the head, and that's the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease extends up to the eye, and the head is purged by medicines of a common nature, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases have been done, and yet it does not help: then he makes cauterizations according to two manners, that is to say, of medicinal fire and of burning.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicinal fire cauterization is that you take a handful of almonds, remove the skin and crush one portion to two horns, and then make a temple or the place where the pain holds in such a way that you can pour the crushed almonds under the skin; and when it is poured, secure and tighten it well and leave it so for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound with oil for two days or three; then put on cotton soaked in butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that you have done these things from some burning medicines that I have written or discussed in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing iron in whose form it is like this:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a bell or if there is one piece of charcoal, and in the middle, it has a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the ash of the ember is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and discharge an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in the shape of a seal, and put it on the place for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterization called "cultellare", all at the point, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and fire do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful place a line half a finger's length long, and lift your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and do not come too close to the bone; and beware of the jaw muscle that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of bloodshed from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in one who does not know what he is doing, and who is not a scholar or experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapiter of extracting the artery, with the cauterizer that has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the other one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear due to cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizer called "poins" with which it has the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After, prick all around the ailing ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to be cauterized; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from scorched nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm and idleness and purging of the head and gargarism, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and put the cauterizer in the part that appears healthy, and make the cauterization near the top of the ear on the inside of the head, about as long as a finger; and let the cauterizer stay until half of the ember is burned; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the semblance of the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	from lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	To this sickness it is fitting to give the patient great and pungent pills for the brain; after, read aloud all that pertains to the chief of the patient; and place on the back of the patient's head a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the manner of cauterization: if you do it just as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, well it is; and if not, then make three cauterizations around the head from top to bottom until the neck; and leave a space of one or two fingers' breadth between each cauterization; and cure him as you would the others; and if you see swelling or inflammation, make one more cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is healed; and it is the "olivary" cauterization, just as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the chill of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is fitting that the head be cleared of years and what we have said before; after, read aloud all that pertains to the chief of the patient; then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the boil is burned, and lift your hand; after, cure him until he is healed, and it is the "olivary" cauterization that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting first to clear the brain of years and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make him gargle and massage the brain frequently with good meat; after, read aloud to the chief in the middle, and make one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one on the basin, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and it is the "olivary" cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thickened phlegm, then apply the same cauterization as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleared, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After reading aloud to the chief of the patient; after make one cloth of fine linen well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and have the patient sit cross-legged, and be well held from all sides; after present the liniment, and moisten with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it over moderate fire, so that the brain may endure it; after empty the circle within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with another good government, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize all over, make multiple punctures on the entire cauterizing iron.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cauterization moistens the brain quite well; and then put a wet cloth on with butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink which clears the head, and watch out for all moists, and make him sweat or take a bath several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, command him to lift up his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of awe is on both eyes together, or if it is on one eye; and stop all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and be the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and take care of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the bleeding with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to stop the bleeding in the extraction of arteries and incision, and what caution to take when making a cauterization or haterel below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the chest of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: one cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and three cauterizations or haterel below the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow at every little cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the chest of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights' worth of cock's blood; after, read aloud to the chief, and make a cauterization in the middle of the "olivary" cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on the two eyebrows, one a little below the hairs; and take care not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then it needs to be cauterized with this fire cauterization which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	because of which there is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is necessary to make two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrow itself is; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted towards the inner side, and pricks the eye, and then make cauterizations in two ways: it is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the patient in a good condition; afterwards draw a figure on the paper of the eyes such that it is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg white and musk-scented persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery where the form is.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn, do it a little at a time many times, until the burned area is red nearby; and the sign of health for the work is that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the scorching is removed; afterwards anoint with ointment until they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start the cautery again on that same spot, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hairs on the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a form on parchment like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made such as the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient's illness is in one eye only, you should work in one, and if in both equally; and put moistened cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in good condition and put your thumb showing above the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he feels biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your thumb.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the biting has passed, then lift up the weight of awe, and reward yourself if you see the parchment lifted just as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine to the wound or have the medicine take effect, until your works are equal and your eyes are pointed; then put on a moist cloth in butter until the burned area is cooled, after which treat the wound of anointing which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to watch out well for your work with great care so that the medicine does not harm your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then the medicine recommences on that place which is softened by the proper parchment, thus as you did before; after it cures until it is sound; and this is the form of the yew tree's leaf.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this you should make your constructions; and do not respond to anyone the right path who does not have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	It seems like a new section has started! The text is now discussing the treatment of fistulas using cauterization. Would you like me to translate the next sentence?
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterized according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand; and hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor leave their head; afterwards put moistened cotton in egg white or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is like this: and it is shaped at the top as if it were the form of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, then it should be aligned from one head to the other, and if you see, then it should be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is worth much for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and take out the purulence and dryness; and if it is closed, then open it and remove the pus from the bowels; afterwards place hot cautery on the surface, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the eye above the eyelid, so that your hands do not go astray; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery once more, and another time if needed, and leave it for three days; after that put on a moistened cotton poultice in butter, and the cure of drying ointment until it is sound, and if 40 days pass and it is not sound, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and then act according to what it comes to in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of fistula cautery that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Listen to the fistula, and stop at the place; afterwards put it in the subtle incision where the form is.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it the size of one third of an ounce of pitch; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and do not move the patient until the pitch does not flow to their eye; and it is necessary that you put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton in egg whites or awe: the pitch thus cleans the fistula and heals by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to make an incision in the neck, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the neck.
des crevaices en levres	It seems like a new section has started! The text is now discussing cracks in lips. Would you like me to translate the next sentence?
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "piles", and likewise on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you cure these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not help, then heat a small cauterizing tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it promptly in those cracks until it reaches the front; afterwards treat the area with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	From the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth, after making a putrid and rotten and being walled off and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you apply .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron becomes cool at the fontanelle, and in the rear; and do thus once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work, then put the patient's head in your own; after heat the cautery that will form hereafter in this manner as you place a cord over the tooth; and put hot hasten into the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your pleasure; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay for an hour and then rinse.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and the medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to two manners: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and melt the end in an iron or earthen spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and do so often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron until the fire comes to the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauterization is such that you take a iron or bronze instrument and it should be large enough that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cauterizer, for which the form will come later, and place it on the skin and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the excitement of this cauterization, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do a cautery wherever you want, and according to what you can; and that is the form of the cord:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of fluid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the fire cautery to the one that comes after it forms the shape, and make two openings for the fumes to come out at the other part of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as needed, until it reaches the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put a damp cotton poultice in butter until the swelling is gone; after that cure the joint with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moors conquer on the channels of the pomegranate, and similarly when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; after that apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and take care not to come close to the throat, and do not burn too much but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the other fire cautery at the neck of the spine to the chief of the spine, and let the clavicle be called "clavile" which we have in front; and treat the place as we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the thorax are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or shivering, and the disease is old, then apply two cauterizations on the ribcage in front; and one other cautery inside the chest between the breasts; and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the form which is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a fire cautery by pricking all the points that are called "points" of which the form is as before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be just up to thirty or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the place according to what was said before, and make three fire cauterizations according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this are the cauteries lighter, because you do them in three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	( Same translation as before )
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After being seated the patient on his back and on his sides; after lift the key which is inside the titillate on the shoulder of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then raise the cautery that has two handles like this is its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the key until it is pierced all along the shoulder, and comes the figure of the cautery together with three cauters; and for this reason is made a cautery with the cautery that has three handles, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauters; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at times it is joined above this one nerve so that there are eight cauters.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place on the cautery a poulice bruised with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens, then make a fire cautery on the thick part of the "clavile" or many cauterizations by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moistures come to the stomach in great quantity until they are brought to its complexion, and many cathartics are multiplied against it, and if customary cures do not help it, then the patient should be laid on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, make three cauterizations under the rib cage down to the quantity of a hen's egg, and one cauterization all along the spine, and two cauterizations on each side so that the figures of the cauterizations are at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they will cause corruption; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they will pierce both parts of the kidney, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that one should be cauterized with a great cauterization in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cauterization, cauterize in piercing and signify on the stomach in one point according to the quantity that you see by measure; then cauterize all along the cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing of the wound that we had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to feel pain from cold and moisture and gross windy conditions, as long as it is greatly changed from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him, then the patient should be seated on his heels; and sign a third cautery of this form and figure and quantity above the liver, below the ribs, where the belly button comes; and have an interval of the size of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long in the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cautery; and burn only the middle part of the cautery, and have the patient stand straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then sit him down, stretch out his legs, and lift his arms; and that is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	Et if your intention is, so cauterize these cauteries of the cutellar, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the keen, for you would dry out all the body; and let it not come just to boiling, for the keen is very subtle there around, and you know for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the fatty part of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the fatty part, the patient will feel pain that is not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, he will feel extreme pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure is over the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient lies prostrate on his head; and then sign above the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a raisin, as regards its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, and viegne jusc'a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu'il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l'art de medicine, and par cui mains ces maladies ont corrut aucune fois.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can be boldly worked on, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients say that one should make for pleurisy cauteries of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the forehead and the neck, and two small cauters a little below in the part that is under the beard; and two cauters between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind; and one cautery in the breast, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it open as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that some old doctor uses a fire cauterization similar to shaving, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and then all pains are overcome, as we have said in the case of the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear for the patient who dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said through the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then three manners of cauterization are added that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation:
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After I insert the two inflamed nerves so that the key is perceived from the other side, and then drive forth the cautery, and thus there will be four; if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when he has taken pollution for long time, and this is true of the other cures before mentioned.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not benefit an humpbacked person, except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the manners we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the womb, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauterizations be well close to the place where the key.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open to generate purpuration for a long time, and do not neglect the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the bone that we showed before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is placed here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish dew, it is necessary that you cauterize above the heel of the foot between the wristbone and the anklebone; and lift your hand with the cautery so as to turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the fontanelle, thus the yellowish dew might be stirred up, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make two cauters on each leg, one at the tip of the cuticular and the other below the knee in front and behind, inside the leg; and let the cauters stay open for a long time without healing, until the yellowish moisture comes out; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by manner of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and having strong virtue, then make one great cautery on the stomach according to what was said before about the stomach's cautery, at the circulatory cautery; and three cauters around the belly subtle as each individual bone is subtle, and two cauters on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the knuckle, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauters on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and consist of large, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, if you make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that one which is entirely below almecdate peccant little by little in triangulating, and one cautery under the jawbone two digits; and if you think that his stomach is refrigerated, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then one makes a great cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for all the cauterization nail-like; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care, let the limb remain until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the fleshiness called "thelul", if you scrape off the cauterized part that looks like a rasp, and then put all ablaze on the cauterized part of the fleshiness cut; and leave it so long as the cauteries come to the opening of the vein, so that the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointments, profiting until they are healed; and if you cauterize a great fire on the flesh, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an untimely wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that it cannot be healed except by fire cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes forth, and is swollen and discharges pus and corrupt moisture, then you must prove the depth of the entire tent, and make sure that you know how deep it is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After sharpen the cautery which seems like a scraper, and plug it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cautery until those corrupt and putrid parts are burned away, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and intestine, then beware of those places, and do not make fires except in a charred area, and think that it is not a peril; after care, let the limb remain until it is healed, and if the places are softened, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is troubled, and the bone is corrupted in its depth; and thus as one of those things we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys and great windiness, and does not take on a womanly appearance, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on the kidneys from one side and the other at the nails of fire cauterization as we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cauterization on the outside of the part where the hair begins to grow on the pubic area, and one on each side, and each be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cauterization on the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be nails according to the form said before.
de la marris	of the membranes
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the membranes are cold and moist, and do not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said for the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauterizations be nails, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the hip of the thigh, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and there is found the wound of the departure, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the thigh with a cauterization resembling a circle, and sign before the wound around the hip as it turns, so that the hip be inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those which have been cauterized in the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three great fire cauterizations on the olive-shaped part, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the keys; and cure him so that he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip of the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been cured with what we have said in the division, but the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or other good-looking pills similar to them.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is thus according to two manners: that is to know together burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is thus according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the back of the haunch three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good profundity and great, and have between each cautery the width of a thumb, and be the cauteries oval-shaped; sometimes done in the middle above the head of the haunch, wherefore there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize at the fire of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in this manner so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the keys of the cure be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain stays in the haunch and does not reach as far as the hip or as far as the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the hip and the knee, make two cauteries on either side where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle four thumb-widths away to the left; and let the cauteries be knife-like, and let the thickness of the keratin be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the two feet or almost up to it, make three or four cauteries where they feel the pain, which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, make more of them; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization at the knife-like or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they were left so that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the belly which led to his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, do a cauterization on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sages say in the cauterization of the groin, this is how it is done, make such an iron and be as big at the top as a walnut of dactyl, or one pomegranate less, and be three quarters of an inch between them and be just enough to fit the quantity of a new pea; and the spaces should be about two parts, and they should also be like beans, and there should be enough iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and if we see little who uses it; and yet all the same it is one of the good cauteries which can be suffered, and where it applies itself.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burning are such that you make an instrument between two things in which the edges of the door descend, and it is made of earth or iron to a length of one pace long, and on top it has three knobs, and each knob has the quantity of the size of a dove; and they are open at the front and back, and come together as one according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After put the bunch of hay under the patient lying on their side, and then put your hand on top of the bunch of hay; afterwards pour hot water between the two circles that has been heated in a pot at one point, and let it be for an hour or time, and allow the patient to feel the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds a mordication as if from fire; and when the mordications are gone, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hot poultice away, and let it be in this way for three days, and put on butter until what is blackened by the scabbing is removed; and after three days when corruption ceases to progress; and that would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the hip or leg, make the instrument that holds it in place according to what you have done in a similar way; and this is the method of the hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot water, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new vessel.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or there is a small hole at the bottom so that the point of a razor can fit into it; and put this pot on top of another well-balanced pot, and place hot water, sweet water above, until you have two layers of powder on top as you will then hold it in your hand; and leave it like that until the water has dripped down to the bottom pot, then take all the water and pour it onto the hot water and alkali just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Et lors si sera much anguish and administered in the movements of medicine and fires; for it works like fire, and also on other medicines that are well cauterized, such as henna, tissoe, and myrrh with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a treatment whose man was cured of the pain in his groin and sciatic vein, and he greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was done, and he became whole again at just one time when this treatment was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in the same way that you take fresh and dry verdigris, and grind it much with a small amount of grease, and put it on the groin, thigh, and leg where the pain holds, and bind it; and leave it there for three hours so that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will depart entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's gall, it helps a lot; and the cauteries should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the other one called the foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take goat's gall in its dry form, and put it on the fire until it is charcoal, and place it on the linen, and let it be there until it cools down; and do it again like this, and do not stop doing it like this as long as you think by sense that he will come to the hainche, and that the pain will cease; and this manner of cauterization is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from falling or percussion or from excessive blood evacuation, or from similar signs of cold matter expanded, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing, unless it comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be freed from fetid pills or other similar things, and that one is applied to their back, where the pain persists, three lines marked with a lead, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterization be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see fit, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the middle nail-shaped cautery in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and narrow back when they wake up, and fear; and you find in the last vertebra of the back and in the appearance which appears above other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you can cure it, then cauterize at the point called "celcle" according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cauterizes each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that it is being cauterized around the spine by the fire for 2 or 3 lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire cauterization to a hollow or bony part which may be near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain from joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain from joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauteries around the jointure of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the surface of the foot, then let the fire cauterize all over the area where we call "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, then let the fire cauterize on each knee three or four cauterizations per part, all over the olive-shaped area; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand there longer than until the flesh of the wound is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the groin and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrist II lines; and if there remains no pain at all to the shoulders, make punctures above each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the armpits or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and provide medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the pitch
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the running comes in sores, and the boils descend to the groin and it is newly, then it is necessary that when you see it curing, it does not waste the day; and that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the wind descends from his belly; after this make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boil is repaired, and then lead him back to your side, and mark with a lead under the running sore on the bone of the elbow, and at all one sign which is similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is pale and produces stools.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reposition the bowels to their place; and the attendants hold his hand above so that they do not return backward; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion and a servant under him, and another one on the chest holding his hands; then put the cautery on the sign of all your fingers, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again another time until you reach the bone; and beware subtly so that the bowel does not burst when you do the cautery; nor burn him; and lest by this the patient die or suffer other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach just to the bone at the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to their measure, and those of great people also great according to their measure; after three days, cure with butter at the site of the cautery until the scabbing is removed; after curing other ointments until they are healed, and have the patient lie down on his back for 40 days so that the wound may be well closed; and it is necessary that their bandages be worn long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he will want to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, let a well-made bandage be applied to him, and wear it for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he trouble himself little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he has followed this instruction, then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say next about the cutting treatment in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the running of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come to other bodies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery of the same kind according to its quantity, and let the third part of the flesh be burned; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said one should cauterize at the cautery into three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the joint and make a line above the ulcer for its width, and another below, and then with your hand fill in all the cauterizing.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are more gentle and moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, either from falling or hitting, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no use, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauterization be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, and virtue, and its location regarding torsions and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cauterization, it's well; if not, start another cauterization on that one, because such custom is that it should be changed to the member that is closest, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	A surgery.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The swelling is aided sometimes by cauterization with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you not see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not relapse or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread to the whole patient, then make V cauterizations on the head: one in the middle of the head up to nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the hatterel; and leave your hand so that the cauterization reaches just to the bone, and until the rinds come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the surgery is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauterizations on the head that we have said, and one cauterization in the navel, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the groin and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the back surface, so you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the arm, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I do of cauterizing, the more it helps and brings benefit; and know that patients do not feel pain from cauterizing as much as healthy people do, because the body is already quite corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that cauterizations be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, ointments, and poultices, but it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little bit deep into the flesh of the wound; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes one makes a cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is removed the swelling; but however no one intervenes unless they are familiar with the members and the issues of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is of no use, then cauterize it with one cautery slightly deep, according to the quantity of the flesh of the limb, until the pus is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour mixed with honey and lentils, and oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of almond, each in a part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for chancres by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen some time ago; and it is more right that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati" and it tars to die or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the old age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood or because of the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it with many small cauteries in piercing; afterwards let it be thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through the cauterization, then heat the cauterization until it takes on its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the midst of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this manner as the course of the purging is eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterward, care for it until he is healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a devouring of member, for it devours the members just as fire consumes dry reeds.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can bear fire cautery together, then prepare the cauterizers both large and small, according to what is needed at the place where the disease is; afterwards, cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized areas a poultice with oil as long as the scorching of fire is removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment by unguents produces flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good; and if not, then re-cauterize on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy has sometimes been cured by medication in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medication in its division: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Much of a time it happens that on feet by default there is born a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great swelling needed which hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is so according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron to the point where it can burn all around, and has fine edges; afterwards, you place it all over the clot, and turn your hand completely around the clot until it comes to the bottom of the clot; and then leave it thus for three days until it begins to suppurate; then apply a poultice made from wild malve roots mixed with oil, and let the poultice stay on all night, and the clot will fall off and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with oil, anointing it until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if it is converted by external ulcers on the body, and often occurs in hands and feet, then you should bring hot water cautery to it; and do this: take a cane of clay or iron, or a feather from a vulture, and place it on the ulcer and the surrounding area, that is to say, pores or small holes; and place the cane so that it surrounds everything, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand by turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the ulcer, and then the hot water will find its way down to the root; and allow the patient a little time for the hot water's cauterization to last about an hour; then leave it like this, and it will fall off all at once with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Sores are dealt with similarly, as long as you gather up all those that are on the body, then cure the swellings that cause flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for shakiness
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shake from chilliness or fever quartan or another, it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if the shaking will cease, and the health of the cold illness will hasten.
des pustules puans	of stinking pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No matter what appears on the surface of the washed body or pustules that stink, which come from great corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	Then it is necessary to do a first treatment when they appear, making a fire cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, by which the point should be seized by fire, or a long aristolochia root, or a lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no matter what, when you cauterize them at the beginning, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further forward, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and are cleansed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great hemorrhaging of blood comes from the artery that is cut off at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And although this happens to someone, if you hurry and put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tightly until the blood is stilled beneath your fingers, and no more drips out; then take up the olive cauteries, many small and great ones, until they are all red; then grasp one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and put it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cauterize so that the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts forth when you lift your fingers off the vein, and the cauterize is extinguished, then take up quickly another of the cauterizes that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing these one after another until the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well staunch it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines put on which have the power to stop blood; and let it be bound and held in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will instruct the patient to staunch with a tight binding of cloths or by placing burning things on it, or other similar things, unless they are not beneficial.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he does not have a mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often when it is very cold, so that the blood may congeal and swell and be staunched; and make preparations for what he needs of cauterizers and medicines ahead.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or burning medicine, and the questions and causes and preparations and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from top to bottom, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way so that what one wants to find may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and therefore it is necessary to take greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have so harmed themselves with their illness that they will die quickly due to the severity of their disease and the greatness of their wickedness; and one should fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who will give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not foolishly act on mere guesses, but wisely about what you are certain of and can grasp; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients, so that salvation may be converted; and this will help you to achieve good renown, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in sections, as is before the section of cauterizers, that I have arranged from top to bottom, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often befalls children during childbirth, and when the woman holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those that I have seen hastened death; and therefore it seems to me that it would be pointless to continue the work on such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer be supported; and so much moisture accumulated that it seemed to be dead, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such that when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a cut in the head, making a wide incision; and it should be as long as two noses, as long as the moisture flows.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that the commissures of the head are open on each part, and the liquid jumps forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: so it is necessary to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after incising, extract all moisture forth.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After binding the wounds with cloths and powders, and putting wine and oil, and leaving it thus until the fifth day; then unbind, and treat the wound by tents and anointings, and let the head be drained evenly, and thereafter feed the patient dry food without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look where the opening of the abscess is, and the gathering of the liquid; for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the liquid, and the flesh as far as you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there is bleeding of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of pus
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease called "catarre" in the eye or at the liver, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is the fire cauterization with those that will cut off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you wish to clean the head, it is necessary for the patient to lower their head; after which, scrape the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, then have the patient pull back their neck to the whole cloth; then look if the vein bleeds, and the veins of one and the other are afterwards behind the ears, and they are repointed; then mark the veins with ink, then cut one and the other with an acicular spatula of two parts, so that the cut comes just to the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as two should be across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood springs out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Et if the artery does not open to feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space between three bones; then sign and fill up just to the bone; and as for what it is necessary to do with blood, it is six c/, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone, point out where the syphac lies; then cut off that apostema lest it not be, then strain the wound and bind, and the ointment cure until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraines come and sharp catarrhs, due to moistures of tears and heats in temples and soothed ancient forgetfulness and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and yet all this does not help, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have counted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient turns back the hairs of his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then pull out the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and raise the liquid of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin slightly until you come to the artery, then take it up to the pincers, and depart well from the threads that are below each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the awl, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Since she isn't cut open, the blood does not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take out the blood of .vi. c/, up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread, so that no bleeding will occur before the wound is healed, and blood will flow decoratively; then cut off the excess that is between the two ligatures at that same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the area with the cutlery cauterizer up to the bone until the veins are cut; and this is the true work, if the patient has no fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cauterization is aid to finish off moistures: for this reason it is more helpful against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you remove them, be careful with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with tents, until he is healed; and if the artery bleeds so much as you work on it, hasten to cauterize by fire, or apply the place with vitriol and strain it with your hand until the bleeding subsides; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until the bleeding ceases, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as necessary; and what is true and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cauterizer cutting to two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand more heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cuttings are too close together, they retain their heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have one large space between the two cutters, and then when you have marked from end to end the two places, take the burning iron and apply it so that it reaches up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two places; and be separated between the two veins because they are not sewn together by this cauterization entirely; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the head below, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's face growing red, and feel a burning sensation on the forehead as if it were trembling; and the oils are hot and moist so that the hairs of the papers have fallen out, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the old "contused cure", and this is what you do for the patient with this disease: make three cuts on the forehead, even and equal in length according to the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be like two fingers deep within the forehead, going down towards the nose, and the other two should be two finger-widths above the eyebrows, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each wound should be three finger-widths across when traversing the joints; and prepare a piece of sponge and many cloths so that the blood can flow, then pour in the absorbent liquid, carefully making sure it's the right shape.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is above the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the membrane that is between the two cuts as far as the surface of the bone, then make another part from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	so put the instrument called "culterelle" into the first incision; and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting on the other side, and that's its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the edge of the blade cutting towards the seared flesh at the heart, and the edge soft towards the bone, and blunt it until it comes to the main cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears at the heart, and then make another part in the main cut up to the other side; and then extract blood evenly, and express the place where the blood has been taken; then put a linen cloth in each cut, and cover with moistened cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and guard against abscesses coming there; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great quantities of lukewarm water, then apply basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the swelling of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with a burning in the eyes as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burnt; and the hair falling out, and the head deep in pain, and the patient is exhausted; then you know by these accidents that those matters and that burning do not come from one voice alone, but from many voices, and the true cure that is there, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to return his forehead, then make a great cut in the forehead, and another of moderate size.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision all the way to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' veins that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow into a sponge, then dry it between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton and linen there; then place damp cloths soaked in wine and oil above, and take care not to form a warm abscess; when it's removed, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with caustic things that make flesh become inflamed.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of aloes, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to inflame flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of three things: either grains, or beasts, or pieces of rock or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as millet, beans, peas; or flowing things, such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it happens in the ear or some other way that does not belong to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill a little bit of violet oil or sesame oil, and then apply extraction; and when the purging comes forth, plug the nose with condiment, and stop up the nostrils when the purging arrives, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes forth by this treatment; and if it does not come forth, apply extraction with fine tweezers, of which there is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer an extraction with a fine thread of small double wire; and if it doesn't jump out in this way, then make a chain of iron and put the head of the chain or the ear canal strongly, and stop what is around the chain with beeswax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it forcefully, for many times it works as we have said; and if it doesn't work in this way, then take glue from which birds are taken, and put in some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and wrap a little cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't jump out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear in such a way that an abscess forms and swells; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient well with cephalic ointment, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends; and let the incision be like a moon, as long as you can reach the stone, then cut it out according to your ability, and suck it hastened to your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grain that is in there and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it can't come out, then administer one subtle spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction be light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In water then that falls in the ear it is necessary for the patient to use purging with condiment first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be held on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps forth because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of the stick you should hold tight and light, and heat them with fire; and put the patient's ear into one or two perforations in his ear, and step back from the other side, and pierce another stone on top of the ear-stone; and do not cease doing this stone by stone until all the water comes out, and thus she will jump out completely; and if you see, take a tendril, and put one head into the ear, and the other head takes fire as long as the most tender tendril is burned; then redo with another set of tendril-some things as many times as the water comes out, just as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	En the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a mouse and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, then use forceps extraction; and this is the thing easier to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of lice from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary to look at the ear to the sun: if any lice appear, then treat them with fine forceps; and if they do not appear, take a thread whose form this is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And bind the most subtle thread in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed strongly at all the cord; do this often until all the threads come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then stop around the cord with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillations which the ancients have proved in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, for which there is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or tin, narrow below to one small hole, and wide above for distilling; and for pressing within the distillation with one instrument of well-made tin, and if you see, take a rasp and wrap it around the point pleasantly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the canal, and that which you see of your medicines in the thread, and the thread should be in the ear; then push down into the rasp all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or flows from the ear; and if the patient feels it inside, and it is a small pot heated over the fire so that one can distill in the ear; and take care not to let it be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some hole in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stopping of wound, or new growth within the ear, and these stoppings sometimes occur very deep in the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes there is a small pot that fills up the hole, and it can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes very deep, if one cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation in many dispositions, and that which can be seen requires that you put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent thickening, then work with all this spatula whose form this is.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and cutting in front and back all plain, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the thickening is of new flesh or cartilage of the ear, then hold it with fine forceps, and cut lightly, until that cartilage is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the pustules are open very far in the ear, then take a subtle, light rasp and heat it slightly on the fire, then put it in the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the impaction that the patient feels grief at hearing, pierce lightly, and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broom; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moist tent made of roset oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if hemorrhage comes from the wound, then plunge an absorbent and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the hemorrhage which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This all that comes out of paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tenaille and forceps, and cut off at a spatula of its roots; then put on the place vitriol broom.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they flake off without a core, then cauterize with the lenticular cautery, and after the incision it moves; and many times repair, but no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the Grisle (a type of wax)
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to the eyes in papers things that seem like hail in their form and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grandine", and it is an accumulation of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the procedures are such: beware if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; then make the donation of the width, then peel each part lightly, then take out with tweezers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cut it without piercing the paper slightly, then don't harm anything to the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble a stitch and cure until it is healed; and if it's small, don't do anything forcefully, for the ointments will restore it quickly and smooth out the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending from the inner ear to the upper part, then turn the paper over, and extract the grandine with fine forceps, and cut and press on both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it will not harm anything; and when the grandine is cut, pour salted water into the ear, and cure the place where flesh grows forth until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is smeared on pieces of paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and greatly distresses them; and they come with catharrhe in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on top, and their papers are moist beneath their eyelids, covered by the swelling and appearance that has hidden the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your elbow to your breast and feel the exinach between.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts their head in your hand; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture with a spatula, cutting a slit of the width, but not more than the wound one makes to heal a vine; and make the skin very thin until you come to the exinach; and in several dispositions comes the exinach from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Here is the translation:
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the hernia does not open at the beginning of the tear, so slightly widen the tear until it appears; then pull it as we have said, then moisten cloths in warm water and cold water, and place them on the area, and hold steady with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who burn themselves and put it on top in order to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it until it is cleansed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to a boil, then the cure with soothing poultices continues until it is cleansed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper grow, other than those that are natural, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes and cause ways of illnesses such as tears, softening of the paper, and whitening, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and there is care according to four manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medicinal water as described in the chapter on cautery, and this is done either by incision and sewing or by cauterization, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your shoulder; then turn the paper of oil towards your left hand; if it has converted, it is good; if not, put an awl into each thread above; and let this be at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow among these hairs, and lead one thread above to all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs that are adjacent, all the spatula copulating from the great tear to the small; then draw out one thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure of anointing, like the leaf of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevating the paper which is divided in all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si aueil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantite de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des loü grant larmier jusque petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles du keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille à tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai àerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz à tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusque III jours ou IV; puis cure la plaie sans costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sans paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi comme li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, à III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what goes above the small threads equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and things are not equal, take a needle where there is thread, and put it in the figure; and put the other thread near the great incision, and the second thread near the small one, and join the two threads equally between your hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have marked, as we have counted, then join the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with ointment and similar soothing unguents; and sometimes it happens that the hairs on the paper are converted: so it is necessary to use what we have said about incising; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a hole in it according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut off the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what goes above the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations from the two parties together; and let it be like this for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and decay and fall off, until it falls away by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, if the pus has formed some strength, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is lifted, and they can no longer be pinched by the hairs; and this is the shape of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine awl, and put one thread of silk into it and make it soft and subtle; then assemble the ends and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then arrange another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and be below the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and gentle work; then put the awl into all the chase in the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce the paper quickly until you reach the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and put that hair into the chase if there is one, two, three, or more; then pull your hand away until the hairs come forth to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below to all the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes forth from the pores above and you see it by the sight of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh rises; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural horse's mane, and be elevated with that which you leave, as long as it is elongated and then lift.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's purging
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" comes to the eye, so there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden wound, or cutting, or burning, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to work on it is that you cut open this wound, and separate its lips, and put inside linen cloths, and tie it until it heals; and it's not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry out and tighten.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, then the illness will return worse than the first; but using soft things, such as fenugreek; and marshmallow or hawthorn fruit cooked, and oil of lilyflower melted in some oil, and wrap it with a cloth, and cure it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to ensure it does not heal unequally according to its former form; and these works that we have said are not other than remedies for this disease, so that it may return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is below which is truly called "axacrati" and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental comes from wound and cutting and cautery and similar things; and the way of working is that you take a needle with double thread, and thrust it into the flesh, and make it pierce from left to right until it comes out on the other side, so that the threads come together in two holes of the flesh; then leave the flesh above all the needle, and cut at the spatula, being wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should, that's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or innermost within the paper; and be the holes of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the shape of a letter which has no name "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges is grown under, from what follows the paper; then join the two parted parts with a linen thread; then apply the cure of what we have said of softening medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from gash or seam or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the treatment according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possible way that it may return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the sudden removal of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture has been done in the same way as the paper above is sewn with white of egg, and it cannot move nor perform its natural actions, then it is necessary that you put the point of a rasp underneath the paper and lift it up; and let it be so pinched, until you cut what is at the subtle spatula, which is not too worn away nor too torn, so that the patient cannot endure having the spatula too worn away or blinding the eye; and your incision, from which you remove this assembled part, should be slightly done, so that the paper may return to its natural form; and let all this assembled part heal, and sometimes do something in the water, and raise it with sweet water, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye a moist linen cloth, and after three days use the colic remedy and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelash is in two manners: it is nervy and resembles a hard scaly skin, and another which is not nervy, but resembles white congealed moisture, which when one touches it with iron and cools it with pincers, cannot be handled; and both appearances begin at the great temple and grow slowly by degrees until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper to your hand, then cools the eyelash with pincers of small double-edged scissors, and lifts it up; then take an awl, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or buffalo, and a strong thread; and double the point of the awl a little and insert it into the eyelash, and pierce all the way to the entire awl, and tie the eyelash with a thread and lift it up, and scrape away everything that is on the side of the eyelash from the prune and the silk to the hair tip; then cut off what remains in the root of the temple at the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural skin or the eyelid, so that through the incision the body's tears do not come forth as usual; and sometimes the eyelashes are only set on the needle and thread, as we have said; then scrape everything off the entire soft spatula from which is the form.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little bit of boiled silk into the eye, and make a colic remedy with litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then apply the cure for what needs to be done until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the eyelash is not nervy and you cannot insert the awl, and the needle cannot enter, then this appearance of eyelash is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have recounted in the division; and if you see it grow, then work on the patient's eye, and take a spatula slightly worn away according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the eyelash above subtly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth to the eye a colic remedy made of litargyrum and red colic, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, as if an aposteme were hot, then let it cool down, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healed; then begin the treatment again just as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye by great harm, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part but not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill into the eye red colic made of litargyrum.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the prunele
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Es eyes of some men never have any redness, and cover the pimple and restrain upon the papers and turn away from the far end, and seem like a rose of balustrade; and the work is that the patient puts his head in thy hand, then thou workest on the eyes, and coil all that red stuff into suitable vessels for this, and sustain it with force; then cut the first layer, and go cutting right to the razor's edge until the end, and take care not to bleed the eye during the operation; and make the incision just as we have said in the incision of the ingrown toenail and with small forces when one removes the shell, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all red stuff removed, then use oil of sesame or you distill a red liquid like corrosive medicines, and put cotton on top of the eye with egg yolk so that it will be assuredly hot aposteme; and if there is nothing left, and the abscess swells up again, and thou dost doubt hot aposteme, then leave the eye and cure the aposteme with soothing things for hot aposteme; then return to thy operation until it is healthy, and thus do all the layers that are removed from the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you ease the cure of each weak oil by the natural way; and by the accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that those members are bearing up to that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins of eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If there are veins that are red and covered on the eye, and they allow vision to work its job and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is then necessary for the first one that you look where the eye is, whether it is healthy or not, and there is no other disease except if the vein; then apply the bandage in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins up to the neck according to his wisdom, and let the bandages be fine and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two circles by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil those veins subtly with force, and remove the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins moving away from the eye; and beware that you do not touch the oil at the points of the spathous membranes, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil green and red pepper to corrupt what remains from the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to coil all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some days until the pains are eased and you are sure of an abscess hot; then resume in this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls this "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in him that you incise on the abscess, where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then receive it with all the instruments by which this form is; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to one head again, and be pointed as a file so long as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is sealed, and flesh grows in it, and the bowels of the body are sealed, and remain thus for XL days, and it does not reopen and is not apostematized, and evil occurrences do not happen, know that he is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to its natural place according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with gentle medicines, and when it is uncovered so take a force according to this form, and let the iron be bent into three angles, and the point be thinned up to the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, and esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os and le sent li malaides by that which the veins in it if he holds his hand on his cloth; and then restore the place of dry medicines such as I have taught you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened the parts, then the matter goes to the cloth; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction to the nose or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal them, then apply poultices or bandages made of linen in a way that will not cause harm in order to draw out; then put on the eye a lien made from aloe, gall, and aloeswood, and then bind the eye with cloth and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is that you take soft drapery and double each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount the eye needs; then bind it tightly with a bandage and begin the poultices again in order not to cause harm; then remove the poultices and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the lien becomes moist, you should bind it very tightly; then remove the lien after a day and a night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good; if not, then repeat the application of the emplaister, drapery, lien, and poultices until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of the vitreous humor
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the vitreous humor, then it opens and comes forth like grains of resin, and it is shocking to see; then if you see it opening, the work is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and bind a part of the vitreous humor around, and tighten it well, then extract the awl and put on the eye a wet linen cloth with egg white; and let it be until the threads choose with the vitreous humor, then cure the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from behind the eye and corrects the moisture of the albiginous and descends the eye, and enters as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eyebrow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a boil that is assembled in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is this: you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your two hands, and lift it so that you see the boil come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not let it descend and be uncovered, and look at the patient's things as he would normally; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the boil's descent is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.
des aigues de l’oil	water of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the likenesses of waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and his good eye should be stretched very tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are to the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are to the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are to the right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown, by the thickness of a hair, on that spot of the eye near the smaller tear-duct; then push the instrument called "almagda" properly, and turn your hand until it pierces into the spot of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prune-leaf to the end of the nourishment; and that is the crown of the eye; if you see the bone on that paper by the clarity of the corneal fabric, then place the instrument just above where the water is, or press beneath one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little, and if the water rises again through the second route, put force with the instrument, and when it is well seated and does not move, gently extract the algumma in circling your hand piece by piece; and then put back into water a small part of the gemstone, and leave it thus in oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by dripping the oil into a cloth or a wet woolen rag in rose oil and abundant egg white, and mix with the pure oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now and those who are of our time, place a common broth with abundant egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too far in depth, but make it subtle, then put in the algumma as we have said; and upon the completion of the work, prepare for the patient's rest with the doctor present, so that he sleeps on his back in a darkened room; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his disposition until three days; then release him in the same darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten this, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Se apostemes chaus vient, that thou removest the oil before the seventh day, and direct it to that which allays aposteme; and when it is appeased, then remove the eye and set on its face a little hole to cover any day, and be there in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then come forth from the house step by step, and convert back to thyself; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the land of Yrach, who told us that in his country they made someone almagda pierce, so that they could suck up the water, but although I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and by chance this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see; and they should be made properly from earthenware.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the ends of these should be of this same subtlety, and the last in three angled corners.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh to the neighbor
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes birthmarks or moles arise in various places, because of which there are some that seem like scorpions to many feet; and if there are such as have skin enchanted with fiery color, and others soft with bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then in that soft birthmark which is not enchanted, it is necessary that you cause the patient to sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour oil on those marks, and treat them warmly; then scrape with what you can sustain at the subtle edge of a razor on one side, until you know that that birthmark is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part that cannot be pulled out, then open it with all one's subtlety and delicacy, so that nothing remains; and if without troubling oneself, or an aposteme comes forth, then cut as needed. And if they are malignant apostemes, then hasten and cauterize until the blood is stopped and all the flesh is removed, then pour wine onto the knee, and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nail does not work, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is cured; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone near in the bone above, to which instruments do not come to cut: then you must put a linen thread about a finger thick, and be numb with your hands, and have between each night an interval of space or less; and place the patient's head on the thread at their nose power, and draw it into odorant so that it comes through the nose inside the mouth; and many times do this to children in schools, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the chief that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after another in being as we are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Leave the flesh so long as you know the night has corrupted that part of it, then take the son, clean the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on top just like before; do that for three days or more until all the flesh that remains is consumed by the ointment; and then put a cloth of cloth over some days until it is healed, and if it needs seeping medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purify the head, through which one distills oils and medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or earthenware, resembling an open lamp, like a chain, and lead them also; and if you see, then make a closed chain, and have the instruments full to purge the chief; and have one handle on the chief to hold it when heating the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh to the neighbor
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there is a disease in the head of the neighbor which is called "tumor", and it grows and becomes large over time, so that it is visible to see; and therefore it is necessary that you make a hole at first, and remove all the fat, then put on top the fire cautery or burning medicine; and if one waits too long to do this until it is large, take heed if it is hard, of bad color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it at all, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of gentle touch, not of bad color, and you can see that you can remove all of it, then empty the patient and the abscess without fear, and treat the wound with things soothing and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neighbor is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Knows that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these joint workings, it profits little, rather than in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to do what happens with anyone, if you look whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then join the two lips together with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their flesh until they bleed, then assemble the two lips together with a suture, and tighten, and sprinkle powder over powder of dragon's blood, and incense broom; and put on the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster following, and leave it until it takes its course, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the seam is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some men have within their lips a hard abscess like grains of millet, smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply oil to the wound after the vitriolic incision, so that the blood is staunched; and then leave the wound open, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is flesh attached to the gums which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the bow or blood flow; then put on top of the wound vitriolic powder, or other powders restraining and desiccating; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms for cutting.
des sordens	of ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs that are ugly and unpleasant; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as far as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell; it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs as they appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness and jaundice and other blemishes, until they are removed; and if one removes what is at the first stage, that is good; but if not, then begin again on the second day and third day, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, because those who use razors to clean between the teeth have different forms than those who use them to scrape off the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay the extraction as long as possible, because this should not happen at all; for it is a very high substance, so much so that one has no excuse for extracting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is forced to vomit, then you must be certain about the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	The patient suffers many times from the pain and thinks it is due to the tooth of Saint Denis, and has the good tooth drawn out; yet the pain does not depart by this means until the evil humour is purged, for we have already tried these methods with saints; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, then you must scrape all around the tooth thoroughly to ward off the gum from all sides; then move it to your two or subtle pincers at the first notch and notch, until it is well loosened, then hold the pincers firmly; and the patient's jaw will be in your holy place between your knees, and you should hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump forth, then take one of these instruments and insert it into each side lightly, and move it just like you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it's necessary to fill it with cloths, there where the perforations are; and if you strain it gently with forceps, so that it doesn't break from straining; and it's necessary to work very carefully around the gum for unseating the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take care not to break it, and leave a part of it, and the tooth will return to the patient through the wickedness of the root, causing him greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act as ignorant surgeons who, through their haste and boldness, break the cartilage and do not achieve what we have described; but sometimes bring great diseases through the roots that remain or through the cartilage they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the hole with vinegar or verbena and silk; and if blood comes out, which often happens, fill the hole with vitriol powder; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments with which one should extract teeth first are those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling out, and be made of well-forged iron, and be toothed to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root stays at the trail, so it is necessary that you put on the site a moistened cotton ball in butter one day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the skin is softened, then put in forceps called "algefri", because it seems to have a beak of care; and be made inside as a file, that's its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these pincers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", which is also known as "palainche", for this reason:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be thick and large so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps over this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, for which the forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two reins, for this reason:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other fixings that are in front of the ratio of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like great pincers, for this reason:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break; and know that many instruments of the teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find for themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of cases, and one does not break the skin or the other bones, where it can, so he searches for instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, for this reason:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then replace it with all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural form of the body, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young girls, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly after the dentin, and is not in its right place, and one cannot smooth or file it: then draw a line; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be made of iron with an edge in shape.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper becomes harder and harder in a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a similar file of this form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little over a few days, so that it does not move until it is done; then make it smooth at the end to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then file off the roughness as much as necessary, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth is loose, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without it falling out, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but it does not work; so they must be restrained by a gold thread, because silver sons turn green and rot, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the width of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth shifting, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the gums between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering up to the part where you started, and restrain your hand subtly and slowly, until it does not move; and let your thread be tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, and les assemble, and les repont entre le dent sain, and le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; and puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, and s'il deslie, or li filz ront, si l'estraint d'un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son temps, and c'est li forme des dens et li figure de l'adrecement des II dens sains, and des II meus, if tu vois:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then one puts it back in its place gradually, as we have said; and does not interfere with someone who is not wise and cautious, and at times one makes the form of a cow's bone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a deficiency, and strains it so that it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None are the lines which come from under the tongue or by nature, as one is born thus; or by accident of a wound that has been sewn together; and the works are such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your own hand, and lift up the tongue; then cut the nervous line of the large, so long as the tongue is disjoined from its seat, and if there is hardness or swelling, and this is due to a sudden wound, then put an unguent and cut the line of the large that binding; and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done this, then lift up the patient's head with rose water and easy, or cold water, and then place a linen cloth under their tongue; and every night, wrap the patient in a cloth so that the wound cannot get worse.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bloodletting occurs, then place on the glass plate and let it flow; and if the blood flows forth, then cauterize with the slow fire cautery, which is good for this; then treat another treatment until he is cured.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see that it is of foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards gangrene, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent and make a fine poultice, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if the wound bleeds at your work, put vitriol on it until it is stopped, then return to your work as long as you are treating all the way; then raise the patient's head with vinegar and oil, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there comes forth in the throat lumps which are called "godath", and they are properly known as "amandres"; and when you treat them, just as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard aposteme of little sense and dusky color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the bloodletting; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will divide it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to scrape, but first look to see if the aposteme is calm and appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Have the patient sit before the sun, and his feet be in good health, and have the work done on the mouth and have the servants hold the tongue between their hands, and press it down to all the instrument, by which this form is; and it should be of silver or subtle lead just as sharp knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue all along this instrument and you see the abscess, then take the needle and the thread in the almond, and draw it forward above as much as you can; and leave nothing loose with the threads, then cut off the instrument so that the form is like one force; and although the head is curved, and from one place to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut off with forceps so that the form remains:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting from one part and the other part numb; and when you have cut off one of the almonds, then cut off the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and easy, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with vinegar, or grated pomegranate peels cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding ceases; then apply a cure until they are healed; and sometimes abscesses arise in the throat that are like the two almonds, so cut them off in the same way as the two almonds similarly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense; and I had well closed off all the throat, so that the woman could not expire through the obstructed passage, and could not eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had risen two fingers' breadth through the two holes of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then, and inserted an onion into one nostril, then the fire was applied, and a great portion of pus came out; then I refilled the other nostril with the onion and worked on the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I inserted the onion into that abscess, and cut off a part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again and again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I bandaged it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus she began to grow well; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the tumor rises to the eye and it is swollen and long, so it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below a great and rounded lump, so it is called "uvula".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut it off; and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a fleshy color or black, then it is necessary to avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger on the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument which we have made a note of beforehand; then insert the onycha into the eye, and drive it downwards, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond natural term; for if you cover more, you will grieve to voice and to word; and after incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear to cover, you should use artifice at the cauterization of the senses to calm their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is fine and smooth.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts their head on your shoulder, and then they press the tongue to the instrument which we have said in the chapter of cautery, and mix with fine living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using this instrument, as shown by its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place your head or have someone else hold the medicine, as the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument on all the medicine above the vein; and have the patient sit up straight on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down to the throat and cause bleeding; then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the vein, for the amount of time equal to half an hour, until you see it turn white and the medication's irritations be appeased; and if you see fit, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument into all the cotton in the cane above, so that the cotton rises up onto the vein; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine cautery, then restart it, and after the cautery, surround the vein with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse everything around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament, ysope, origanum, rue, camomille, and avronne, and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them together into one pot, and add a small amount of water, and make it boil; and let the pot be well glazed with earthy matter, and have an instrument inserted in the pot according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether of silver or of lead, and whether one of the key stones is inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is mortified; after which it often recurs, until the eye dries, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the swelling of the abscess hot, for many things happen there; and do not do this anything but at the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cord and put inside the head a quill of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the quill of egg does not allow the vapor to trouble the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it appears on the throat as a bone or fishbone, or nothing at all; therefore, you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue onto the sun at the instrument's entire length, so that you can see the thing being affected; and what does not become apparent and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in their stomach; perhaps this will dislodge the stuck thing through vomiting. Or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a dry crumb of bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then re-swallow it; and when it comes up again, you can pull out what we have said; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument made of plover according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu'il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;
de la sansue de la gorge	of the sweat of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine for the sweat, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not benefit at all, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, then press his tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see pus, then extract it little by little with a small incision or with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, then take a woolen cord, and tie it around the patient's neck, then tie the hot iron to the cord and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is troubled by water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full vessel of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the pus feels the water, it will spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asafoetida at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will eventually spit without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and have the pos covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in this perforation be the key of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient put the head of the pipe in their mouth, and shut the mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the sweat; and the sweat will now fall, and if it does not fall, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to pass through this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which you treat the sweat is such that when you can see it, it resembles curved pincers to enter the throat; and it has a resemblance to a doctor's beak, and has an asperity like lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered here and there in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which one is like itself, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those who are at the core.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fatty part are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its judgment in work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if an abscess is not to be pierced until the bowels are full according to their completion; and if there are some that must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, just as abscesses that occur near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and one leaves it until it is all rotten around it, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is on the main member, and if you delay perforation until it is all rotten, it will harm the main member; or it is at the foundation, so one should pierce it when it is ripe; and it does not matter that you do not pierce a ripe abscess without digestion being complete, except for the one that is at the foundation, which cannot be pierced deeply and becomes elongated inside, and thus forms an abscess; and it will not heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the sign of perforation of the abscess when it is dead according to completion, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departures of fever are ended, and the reduction of pain and heat, and the quieting and soothing of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation where it appears most prominent on the surface of the abscess, and where it opens up; and let the perforation be of sufficient length to reach through the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints, and on nerves and arteries, and in all equal parts where there is no pain.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who limp, due to pain in that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in its place and hardened, it's worth doing so that you leave the incision until it is confirmed in completed digestion as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you make the incision before that, the body will be drained of its venom from it, and it will be filled with much filth; and by chance the lips and the bottom parts will harden in it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions in small abscesses, small openings; and in great abscesses, great openings, and many splits according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where one must cut off the skin, and cover; when it has become as worn out as a rag, and is exhausted, so you must do as with infants: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those whose covering is like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses of angels; and if there are those where one makes a circular cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil who have not point of chief, if such aposteme souef superficial, it covient that thou loo perces plainnement; and covient when the apostemes is gros, and it has coillit grant bowe, and thou loo perces, if ne traire mie toute la bowe in that hour, but in train one part; then stope the aposteme just to another day, then in train no thing thereafter; do so by many times of good in good, until the bowe is out altogether; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits tremble sometimes with the issue of the bowe, lest by chance the patient dies, and thou dost not take heed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your aposteme, if the wound is clean, and look to see if the wound of the aposteme is small; and if it's a plain cutting, then make tents of linen or old cotton; and if it's large apostemes, and there are many holes, then it's necessary that thou puttest in each one a tent so that they come together against one another; and if you have cut into the aposteme part of the skin, and you have covered it around, then it's necessary that you fill it with old cotton or rag of linen without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding during your work, so administer cold and clear water and moisten the cloth, and place it on the flowing blood repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, so administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is at the time of winter, and the boil or abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary to put on wet tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the boil is flesh-like, then it is necessary to put on wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the abscess and discharge and cure it, as needed, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or the cure for head boils comes in small abscesses, and they are manners of ours that are in cloths, just as the yolk of an egg, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It is of fat and such where it has moisture also as pimples; and if there are such that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of tailing is such that you test all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes thus afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then make an incision above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, then scrape off without leaving anything the skin that contains that moisture, for it will return again if you leave anything; then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and let it be until the next day; and those who are remaining from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not linger overnight; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is necessary, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is not very large, cut it according to this form, from long; and remove the blisters, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment of drawing out into a cloth where it lies; and if the artery makes you contrary, do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do with the abscess if it is pustular, and cutting and curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on top of the pustular abscess and the moist one, if it is more light, because they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or the head does not have moisture, and I found this abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone that could not be broken; and if one had done anything to it, one would have made as much a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come to the chief of children and roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, so that the pus may issue; and the cure as it is needed.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and below the armpits, and also in groins, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are very painful, and are swollen one against another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, just as the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said; and similar things to these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Then when you see a good disposition to touch it, and it is similar in color to the body, and quiet on each side and not inflamed at the neck or artery or duct, and not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut above, and scrape off each part, and keep the two lips of the wound as close as possible, if you need to, just as we have said in abscesses of the head; and proceed slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor should it be too tight nor too loose, so that your hand may escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut off what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stay blood, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; and then examine your wound indicator to see if any small scrofulae remain, and cut them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a great vein at the root of the scrofula, then it's not necessary for you to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall away from there without harm; then apply the wound with old Egyptian cotton soaked in oil, and then treat.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you clean out the entire scrophula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, then there will be no excess remaining due to the greatness of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and pull strongly, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that retain superfluity, open up where it appears more; and it opens in the same way as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then tents with ointment and similar things are applied, so that what remains of the corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleansed, then a cure with ointment brings forth flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	of gangrene
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have gangrene, it is necessary that the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not provide help by doing so, because all the veins and the pulsations of the patient's body are hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both shoulders.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pulsation, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, then, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four with a small opening in the middle, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the syphac; not in the cartilage; and these parts are suitable for the section of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its extent, then cuts the leather until it comes to the knot; and avoids the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then closes the sycamore, just as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the fleshy part of the neck which springs forth through the broken place and due to the lack of voice; and leaves the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the time is passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound by the key, and sew all smooth without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	All this said is that one should not do this just as long as the throat is completely filled, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the fault is being wasted.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglote because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took the knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the mouth; and I was summoned to cure her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut open her jugular vein nor anything but the throat, and the blood was flowing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was healed; and it happened to the young woman that she lost her voice, and then returned to her normal condition; therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of jasper, and it occurs mostly in women; and it happens according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural ones have no artifice.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to our fat, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and it should be feared, and one should not dare to do anything that might harm him who is small, and search every recess: if you find it like I did not think was fat, and cannot move in any way, then cut it off, just as one cuts through fat, and treat it with all your skill, if there is anything; and search well throughout, and cure it as needed, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	of the flesh
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many manners we are, all of which I will say resemble each other; and now it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is hot and feverish, as long as the ebullition has not passed, and the corruption is accomplished; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the nout there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a sac called its own sac which is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a seed, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, either fat or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the flesh, that you prove and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "intermittents", according to what its form will come in the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses in us is that you take or find the moistest part of the abscess and turn your two paws and paws, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, according to the size of the abscess; then extract the foreign substance, and be careful so it does not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture pours forth quickly, regardless of its color, do it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the incision no more moisture comes, know that it is fat, so then do it in crosswise cuts, take it up with pincers, and gently scrape off each part and follow the direction where it lies, leading you to a healthy piece; and if you cannot lead it to health, then break it down into pieces such that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, then the wound comes back many times; and if there is only a little bit left, and the blood bothers you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, apply it to the wound, and put hot soothing poultices on the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed; and if the wound is large, then cut off two lips of the wound, and cure it with those who are familiar with skin.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beats against you or some other obstacle is contrary to your haste and you apply a leaden weight of vitriol, let it remain for two days or three, until the wound has purified, and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the flesh.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here is the translation:
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of ulcers are many and similar, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and also ulcers that have two horns in three ways; and also ulcers that have three horns, and are in three ways; and also ulcers that have two horns, and single-horned ulcers, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are cut, and some do not cut off more than from one side, which causes us to scrape the skin, so that we cannot tie the vein or nerve; and among these intervening things are the replies answered in bands, so that the patient does not perceive it at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only on a charmed place, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scraper for flax, according to this form, by which we stop blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals quickly from veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Breasts swell in some men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem to be women's breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them must be treated according to this form from line .b. up to .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and apply a medicinal paste to the wound by pouring in flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast droops down and becomes wet due to its size as in women, then divide it into two sections above, with two similar incisions; so that one part holds onto the other at the end of each part, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line .b. up to .g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about the seam and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed or the incision is not yet fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to excessive bleeding, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton in corrosive oil; and leave it so that it dissolves the remaining fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are hard forms of scrofula or there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for it with ointment according to this form until he is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the kind like scrofula, then do it as we have said in incisions for scrofula, and if the wound discharges pus, then apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is blocked, and the skin above it is sealed, many times abscesses come forth; and just so happens it with the vein being filled and abscessed; and if one knows this when it's because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it at your elbow, you will feel straining; and when it's because of the vein, then there is a reason to fear appearing; and it's foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it's under the armpits and in the groin and neck and many other places, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is necessary to seek the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head must also seek it; and in that which is filled with arterial blood, make an incision above the skin as long as possible; then work on the shape of the arteries, and carefully separate the artery from the surrounding tissue, until it is fully exposed; then insert a needle underneath and have it pierce all the way to the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you about extracting the two arteries that are in temples; then tie off the area between the two threads with an introducer until the liquid inside has flowed out and the abscess is freed; then apply the treatment of ointment as needed until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, you must bind what can be bound from the abscess all around the skin, then insert a needle underneath what you are holding in your hand, and have it pierce, with a double thread, so that you pull it out to the other side; then tie off the abscess as I told you, or tie it off with one of two parts to the two joints of the thread; and if you doubt that the filaments will not come loose, insert another needle underneath all the way around the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and restrain the filaments in four places; then cut the abscess until any superfluities flow out, then cut off the superfluous tissue and leave what is bound; then apply a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments with tenting and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, so too do abscesses come on the nails when they are forced, or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this occurs most often in joints and sinews and in all places where there are articulations, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when one strains strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the very depth of the body, but beneath the skin; and it can be seen from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and he who is in articulations should not be cut by iron: for there may be contraction; and he who is in the head or on the forehead, makes the leather strap tight.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, then take hold of it with forceps and cut into its root; and if it is large, then suspend it from a hook, flay it, then remove the bone and sew the wound shut to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of great haws hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Once in bellies and not at all elsewhere the other, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by resemblance to those, and has subtle roots, and thick stalks; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw one man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split, and in them ran a moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and in the incision it is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artemisia is white and moist with a subtle root; so cut at the spatula wide, and be present with fire cauterization.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enchained abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the bowel is foul
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery or a wound in the groin area and is on the belly and stays for some days like it happens with other ulcers, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from inflammation; and if this is due to the route of the syphilitic disease and the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and it becomes apparent through diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it to its two sides it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be stuck, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it becomes apparent well when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, then it appears through these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to inflammation, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is from blood of an artery, or vein, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave the wound.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowels, you must instruct the patient to straighten his body and be stretched out all straight; then sign around the abdomen with your finger; then command him to lie quietly between your hands; then go around the place where you have signed on the skin, and lift up half of the abscess above the great incision; then bind it tightly with a strong thread or a piece of strong silk, and let it be securely tied; then work on the lifted portion of the abscess, and insert your finger indicator, and find the intestine; if you find that it is caught by the thread, then free it, and push the intestine back into the belly; and if you find the bowels, then take hold of them with the incision, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery or vein resists, go around it slowly, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and wrap the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as you would make an incision; then strain the abscess into four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place so that it can heal, and let the dead flesh die by itself; or you will cut it when it has become subtle and perishable, then cure what needs to be cured, and leave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture you find, then cure the skin of what needs to be done, and sew the skin.
dou chancre	of the chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment by fire; and we say that chancre breaks out in the groin, and great caution is needed in its cure; and the ancient ones say that when chancres are in a place where they can be removed like those that are on the breast, and in the armpits, and in similar places, one should remove it all at once when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I never saw anyone heal from it; nor did anyone ever before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make him sicker if he has manifest repletion; then bind the patient well on a good bed to perform the work; then throw away your gallows or chancre, and shape it all over, and cut it off all over leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press the place well with your hand or something, and if the outflow of blood makes you resistant to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure him with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: thus it is indicated; and one should not touch with iron on these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy called "ecclites" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as indigestion and similar things; thus one should not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then do so: lift up the patient on your hands, and the attendants press the belly by pushing out the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spatula-like spoon according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut open to two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And be cut open to two parts.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of lead or lighter iron, and has one small perforation in the lower part; and on one side, three perforations; and two on another side, and one on another; and the cut edges are trimmed like a feather, and this is the form of the incision which writers fashion into a quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l'aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l'estrumen; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu'il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l'arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l'estrumen et retien l'aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j'ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l'estrumen l'autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l'aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu'il ni demore mais c'un poc d'aigue.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Et if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water, so cure with hot sand or burning hot and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and if it takes on drink; and cure with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stoppage of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Some times children are born without a wart on their penis, or the warts are small, or they are not in their place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce through all the skin layers very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the wart under a thin piece of cloth, and bind it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, remove the covering and let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance there is no harm, because the urine that comes forth does not leave the opening closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Whoever has a perforation that is small, it is treated with the medicine of a plug of cloth, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the perforation in its place are befouled, for no one is born with a perforation at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and cannot menstruate because the material cannot reach as far as the cervix, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and then you take hold of the head of the urethra and cut it as the shape of a feather, so that the pit opens in the middle, as it should; and beware of excessive bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and cure the wound until they are healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of the boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them to a subtle onion, and cut and clean all of them, then apply moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, with foul smell and pus, then you must apply a cauterizing treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and the ulcer is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is closed, then care for the one that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you treat it together, so the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and thus comes forth and corruption in its head and in its member; so one must take away all that is black and corrupted, then put on a poultice of honey and flour made from the rind of green apples and vinegar, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes forth, so administer the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is helpful in two dispositions together: namely, at the bleeding of blood and at corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, so it is necessary that you tie off or constrict the penis with a piece of cloth, and have the patient urinate between them; and when the hairs are grown back on the head of the penis which have not been circumcised, or where there has been injury or abscess, so it is necessary then that you cut away with a well-sharpened instrument, as far as the ligaments are loosened, and free the head of the penis from all parts; and if this is a painful thing to do, so it is necessary that you cut away with a small spade-like tool or a small knife near the head of the penis and the foreskin; then sever neatly in two, and insert a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water, so it will not grow back again.
de la circoncision	Of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; however when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and doctors who performed circumcision around one inch, with force, and to everything a new skin; it would be hot because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then it must be covered up, and the pain is doubled, and at the moment of skinning that part of the member is not ensured; and at the skinning of the wound by chance the iron slips out, and the work is ruined, and many times thus it happens that there is no need for skinning and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the skinning which is done with force to all the thread of wool I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you press your hand, so it is equally tense in all directions; but the cord should be well twisted around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you cause the child to think, if they understand, that you are not doing more than tying the cord around the penis as much as possible, and then let it rest in every way that you can; then make it stay between your hands straight up, and restore the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or puff, and train it upwards as much as the head of the penis is in; then cleanse well of the ordure that is assembled there, then tie the skin signet with a double thread, then lie under one link to another link; and hold it by both sides through the second ligature to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two links, then lift the head above hastily and train the head of the penis; then let the blood flow slowly slow, for this is the mothers; and put powder on top and top the drapelet glued with a yolk of cooked egg, tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the skinning is this: the two heads should be held and should be cutting, and should be the heads equally as big as the fingers equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the skinning is when the iron inside flows into the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the edges make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it exceeds three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then leave it until the abscess has subsided, and scrape off lightly; and cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, for nothing will harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound with sudden powder, which we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too much with the iron, and it goes above, then it will not harm; then cure him as we have said, until he is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Li retenue of the urine is a constriction of stone, or blood congealed, or bowel, or fresh charcoal, or similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone that is situated at the waist or navel of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent down on their knees; and they should have their feet placed on the back, and stretch out their belly from above to below the back, and restrain the patient's abdomen as much as they can; and then the necks of the bladder are constrained by expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction using all the instruments called "siringue", which has this shape: and be made of subtle silver threads, like the feathers of a bird; and be one and a half palms long, and be delicate at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, and lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; and cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, and fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, and li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, and la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, and ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, and li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, and fai corre l’urine; and rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, and soit aligiez li malaides.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcerations or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then use all the instruments called "clepsedre", and this is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	Elle est close, and if it has three holes: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the lead melts by which the medicine is so shaped that it can be inserted well without addition, so that we can draw out the moisture, and then push when needed; and when you see your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the keel into the moisture, and pull with the puller who is inside; so pulling the moisture into the keel, and then strongly push the puller inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one purges the bladder: thus it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or archaean, and the head is higher; and below is one side where the threads fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see used to purge the bladder, then tie between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pot on the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the vagina, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has been emptied, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and bore it roundly around; then put the thread firmly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and tie to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone incurred from rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by size; and in the bladder, and in the vessel; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is incurred in the bladder happens more often in children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there appears hairiness, and the patient's member grows, and swells many times, and then becomes inflamed; and at many of these jumps the foundations are shaken; and is lighter the healing of children until they have three years, and it's very grievous in old men, and it's moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and is the cure more light for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a cathartic, in order to draw out all the bad blood that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders finding the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move down so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from the high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is completely leaning downwards; then search for it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in position, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't come out with the touching at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is elderly, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; and push it into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, then loosen it at the neck of the bladder; then press down on your finger, and push it out to where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him that he stretches out with his right hand the intestines up high, and with his left hand takes away the skin which is below the intestines in the part where one makes the incision; then put the spatula closing, thus it is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Et fent entre ceu who is between the testicles and the fundament, not in mid-distance but on the left side of the snowless flank; and be straight above the stone, and both feet should be at the fundament, and let the shape of the traverse be so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, nor too great; by chance the pressure may come to the foot which is on the fundament, that it jumps far without trouble; and know that there are stones with angles and margins: if it is thus, it is good to go out; and there are those who are smooth, similar to a leaf, and rounded, from which the issue is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A those then where there are angles and margin, make the shape larger; and if it does not jump, then you must stretch above with the forceps that are like a file at the head, to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you can push down the lower instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot shape it thus, then enlarge the hole little by little, and if the flesh is cut, then strain it with vinegar; and if there is more than one stone, then push first the largest to the navel of the bladder, then cut above, then move forward, and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it must be sewn, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out quickly where the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless strive to extract it, or break it apart with pincers, until you have divided it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, so apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it, and place on top of it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient with his shirt, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, then arise very well the wound of oil and water; then treat him with diaphonic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corrosion, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained there by urine which flows without interruption: then pour your drink into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and harm it; then lift the wound with water, vinegar, and silk, and help him in all ways you can, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	Et if the stone is small, and it is in the canal of the penis, and fixed inside, and the urine cannot come out; so treat it as I say thus, that you should cut it many times, and do not excuse yourself from cutting for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this shape and be fixed at three angles in one soldering:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and wrap it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go further into the bladder; then insert the point of the probe lightly into the penis until you come to the stone; and turn the probe in your hand slowly and carefully, as much as you can, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; and soon the urine will flow, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And soon it is broken, and the stone goes out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this because of anything that hinders, then take the thread under the stone and the other above, then bend the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that the stone is lodged in women, and if it ever happens, then the cure is difficult, and it is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will reveal herself to the doctors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, so it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the crotch, there where the apparition appears, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her anus above the stone or below, and be the tail at the first small size; then put the heat into the tail, if you sense the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows forth, put vitriol powder on the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work as long as the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work. And if the blood flows forth, and this is due to the artery being cut, put powder on the wound and strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again, and let the stone be and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient would die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the swelling has passed, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Fleshy hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is below the layer of the scrotum that contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the lining of the egg, as if it were another egg; and this is the skin of the scrotum between the white pus that we have said; and this only happens when it does not.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this fleshy hernia is from weakness that comes to the scrotum, and it spreads this material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes if it comes from percussion on the groin, and this moisture has many colors: or it's declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white like water, and this happens more often; and these are signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is in white scabs as we have said, then it is a reabsorbed abscess, about the length of an egg yolk, and does not open up the groin, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture on the actual membrane, then it is a reabsorbed abscess with a part of an egg yolk, and because of this one thinks it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white scab, you sense it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding quadrature, for which the shape is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what appears after the entrance, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when we treat it with iron, so the patient must be cleansed according to our power and the fullness of their body; then bind them on their back, on something slightly higher, and put many cloths under them; then sit on their left side, and instruct the minister to sit at their right, and extend the rod to one of the two furrows of the testicles; then take the spatula gently, and cut the skin of the testicles through the long part until near the fingernail, and make your incision entirely straight while cutting the skin of the testicles just so that it becomes white, and scrape subtly according to our power; then pierce the white part plain with water at a large perforation, and extract all the water, and then put on the sutures, and raise the white part above; and do not touch the furrows of the testicles, but only the white part; cut out all or in pieces similarly the edge of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it well it will flow with water again; and if an egg bursts forth at your work, then bind it back in its place when you have completed the work of the white part; then assemble the two leaves of the furrows of the testicles into a seam, then cure it as you would other wounds, until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you stop the bleeding of the vessels that are suspended; then cut off the scrotum above the suspension, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two stitches; then cut the other part as you have done the first one equally, then wash the blood, and put a damp linen cloth in rose oil in the wound; and put another damp linen cloth in wine and oil, and put on top of the two compresses, and put above double drapery, and tie it securely to all the bandage that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two drapery pieces, and put them in wool according to this shape, and assemble them by sewing in the armpit of the breeches, and one of the straps takes up on the foundation to the back, and the other to the pointing part; and the other strap goes over the two shoulders, and is all assembled into a restraint in the buckle of the braier; and sometimes this stitch is used instead of cautery in place of ironwork, and it's that you take one cautery cutlery subtle, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white scurf that contains water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that scurf at once, and scrape off with this subtle hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And bring fire in all the ways you can, until you have reached everything; and beware that the flames do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and be careful with respect to bleeding, and more careful with respect to the work of cutting; and if nothing else makes you contrary, or abscesses form, or bleedings or other things, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then administer perforation, as I tell you, and know that when you are well assured by the signs we have said that the abscess will liquefy, then place the patient on a light siege; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the entire spatula-like width, and put the perforation at the length of the body; and make the holes wide so that all the liquid can flow forth; then place cotton on the spot, tie it, and let the remaining liquid flow; then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to come out in the mouth of the wound, then you should insert a pin or the instrument used to treat hydrops, for which this form was made; and enlarge the poultice on the wound, and know that the liquid returns, and it will assemble after six months or around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the balls
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this chapter there are many fears and dispositions, for which it seems to me that one should leave it as is; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the balls; and this is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known by acidity and ague, which spreads to the groin, or through percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and it does not bring pain, and is a grievous abscess; and by chance there are some grievous abscesses that are fearful and stony, with a flux of color, and sometimes comes from a swelling of the artery or an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to a swelling of the artery, then it is known by the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	The one who is caused by an inflammation of the vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touch with the fingers, and it can be well cut on this appearance, and on other wounds; and that you take the key of the groin, then lift up the swelling in high, and treat the part above the white fascia, and relieve the suspended parts from all parts of the swelling.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already opened with these charred pieces, it then behooves you to treat the vein and the copa; and if it is air-filled in the syringe or within the vessels, it then behooves you to release all that tension and the copa again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the bone is in the rear, then it is necessary that you cut it all off and draw out the yolk, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then wrap the wound in damp wool cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the balls
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a birchen bark, with the softening of the stones; and the patient groans grievously as he walks; and the cure for this disease is just as frightening as the one before, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It behooves you to have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspender of the stones down between your thighs, as far as the vessels that are near the penis, and hold them firmly; then cut into the scrotum with a broad, sharp instrument in the direction of the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape each side, just as we have said about the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come out, and tie it again at the other end; then cut into the medium properly, according to the length of the body, and drain the corrupt moistures; then treat the wound just as with others that are not complicated by bowels; so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the testicles; for through this there will be no harm, and if all vessels come into view, it behooves you to remove the testicles from all the vessels; so that the kidneys do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and wither and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the pitch
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is from cutting the groin, are that it makes a sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing under the skin close by, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's reaction to the cut in the groin.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the entrails become entwined with the intestine, and it is retained there, and causes great pain to be suffered by the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments one should fear, because of which one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Et the manner of the work is that you command the patient to insert the intestine into their hand within the wound if it can be inserted; then be stationed on their collar between your hands and lift the flaps; then expose the cure above and cut all the skin of the testicles from the long; then put inside the leaves of the scale tied according to what you need to open the wound, so that the eye can issue; then scrape off the scab that is beneath the skin of the testicles until the white scab on top is uncovered from all parts; then insert your two fingers into the opening between the testicle and the white scab which is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second scab, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second scab; and then move your right hand within the cure of the testicles, and expose the white scab on top to your left hand, and lift the egg to all the scab towards the scale; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release what is behind the bond; and take a needle where it has been made with 10 threads, and insert it into the back part of the scab which is after the skin of the testicles; then cut off the threads that appear on the other side of the threads, as many as there are four threads; then assemble one thread over another in the form of a cross, and tie the scab with a strong bond from two parts; then envelop the threads of the testicles and tie them strongly to two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest an abscess arise; and put on top the bond according to the first long bond two fingers of it, and after these two bonds leave the scab which is beneath the skin of the testicles a great distance equal to one finger; then cut off in the part that is beneath the skin of the testicles as long as the flesh remains, and the bowels, just as we have said before; then apply wet linen to oil, and put it on wounds, and put on the bond that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white fatty tissue that we have said is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Because this happens many times, and let the bond be as long as it chooses for itself; and if it delays falling, then arise from hot water, and put what we have said on top of it until it falls; then treat the wound with another cure until it is completely well.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to do the treatment by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made in the manner of the vine that surrounds the stalk, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting above and below slightly; then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels fall; and cure it as we have said, until it is completely well.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	It never happens that a hernia comes out in the groin, as we have said, and opens up the swelling; and no intestine descends to the scrotum, and if it does descend, it's rare, and repair all hours; and yet if it stays too long in this position, the wound or syphac grows, until the intestine descends; and this happens through the stretching of the syphac which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then becomes softened and swells the swelling and opens up; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes the cure is done with iron in this way: and it's that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the hernia which has swollen out from the wide according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is under the skin next to the bone, then take the root and put it on top of the swelling appearing from the syphac; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two swellings appearing from the syphac on top of the root, and cut one and the other; then extract the top of the root, and do not cut the syphac or stretch the egg or any other thing, as I have shown you in the cure of the vine of the intestines; then cure it with the wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the sons, so mend and cure the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The groin is constricted, and has no appearance in the sprain, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it is a sight to behold; and when one wants to treat it, one must have the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then tie the two edges together with a seam, and if you see fit, sew off the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches; then cut between the stitches, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is completely healed, and let the thread fall.
dou chastrement	The punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castration is provided for in our law, and therefore I would have been pleased if I did not speak of it at all in this book; and there is no need to mention it except by two manners: one being that the surgeon can respond when asked about a wound and its cure; and the other because we often have need to castrate certain beasts to help us, such as goats, sheep, and cattle and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one where we do it by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then we take them in our hand, as long as they are released and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: instruct that you grease the animal, and press the skin of the testicles into your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut on each nut to the cop, when you have well scraped them; and leave any small or subtle scar tissue that is above the vassels; and this manner of chastisement is milder than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something remains from the testicles, for which the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it is sound.
des hermofrodites	Of Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodie is in two manners with men: one is that between the two testicles appears as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in court, urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is with women, and has on the thumb as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Et the cure of man and woman is that you treat the gathered wounds, and the wound itself as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the kidneys, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of Tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The tenting is a gathered wound on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should remove the excess of the tenting to your hand or fingernails, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deeply in, lest blood come forth, then treat another wound until it is healed; and one other sore that arises at the mouth of the hair, and the swelling, and by chance jumps forward, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow's disease" in ancient times.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you bind it, as we have said about the temperament, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of Erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is irregular if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or if the womb is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident by disease that has come; or it is caused by a hidden fault, or subtle or excessive humor, and it is done in front, in the sides, below, or wherever; and it hinders conception, and childbirth, and often gives rise to flowers having; and the knowledge of this is known through the sight of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are nearby appearances, then apply them to the arms or the thigh.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to subtle humors and it appears near the two kidneys, then hurry, and do thus: place your two middle fingers together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then straighten out the two kidneys until the subtle humors are released, and cover the swellings; then take linen, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, and have the woman lie down at home each day, so that she cannot sweat.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sacrum is hard and dry, then you should lay on the spatula something like a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of flesh birth, then suspend it at the incision and lay on the spatula; and have medicines that stay blood, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then administer a cloth of linen wide, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus be long enough, then provide a tent of dry linen; then cure other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes flesh birth, then it should be covered according to this manner, unless it is incurable abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an incurable abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Varices are openings of veins that do not have a natural opening, and when varices are old they become ulcers; and we have said in the division those who resemble them, and their signs, and I will say here those which receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to sense, except by iron remedy.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the rectum, where one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then extinguish the pile with forceps, and cut it at its roots, then powder on restraining blood medicines such as aloes and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet to the ankle for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if any bleeding comes forth, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster for her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he stays, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him take poultices to the back and breast so as not to hurt; then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elder with old wine, and apply to the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess heals, so treat the wound with oil until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so cover it as I said to do the same; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of Abscesses of the Womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the mother, such as chance and stony abscess and herpetic abscesses and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the womb, which is not one of the abscesses that boil forth; and if you want to know how to work with iron, then look to see if the abscess is inflamed at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the patient recover until the pain is alleviated; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he leans against them, and support him on his back and assemble his legs away from the leg; and be his hips spread, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good bandage; then succeed to the left side of the right shoulder, and install the instrument with which one works the mouth of the womb, of which the form follows; and it is necessary that when you see fit to install this instrument, that you place the first notch in by to know the depth of the womb, so that what enters into the instrument does not come more than a finger's breadth deeper than it should, and that it does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depths of the womb with cloths, so that the instrument does not annoy him; and it is necessary that he put the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess opens and one makes it soft with the hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the shoulder joint; and when the bowels are empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound damp cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil; and place the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the marsh, and put a cloth above the marsh and above the pointed linen cloth netted with water or mallow cooked; then cure after two days of anointing as needed until it is healed; and sometimes remove the bandage and the wound by pouring water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and long Aristolochia are cooked; then return to anointing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is stuck in the marsh, then it is necessary that you take care not to cook with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and signs that are when you see the woman hasten downward, and desire to give birth: then the child hastens forth quickly; therefore know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue comes under his head, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly so that the child comes out soon; for when he descends above his head, then the secondine is with him, and the marriage is freed from its superfluities through good purging; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it happens sometimes under its feet, and comes forth the body or the head, or hands, or when it comes under his belly, or shoulder, and is converted by chance above his neck, and through other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out above its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and let the mixture of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour it between her breasts, a little spatula-shaped thing, which is in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	et fende la secondine, and cut the afterbirth, and cope a son ungle until the moistors which are in there flow; and take the belly of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek decoction with sesame oil; then make her take and estrue of condisi, and keep her mouth and nose one hour: so now the child will.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, then it is necessary that you pull them back gently piece by piece; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then take away the stool from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall down; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the blade that was put there before, and extract the child, and pull back equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to support it high up; and then turn it little by little until it is even; then take hold of its feet and stretch them out little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump up to the crotch, if it is commanded to, and make it stutter with conditions; if it jumps further, God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not further as we have said, then turn it a little at a time, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take mugwort from aloes, and oil of sassafras, and boiled gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of a woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in lukewarm water up to the navel; and when she is moistened underneath, then apply a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her strain her mouth and nose, and press lightly on the belly, for the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From childbirth on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, so it puts its hands on and off; then it looks up at his neck, and the feet hang down below, and it leans forward over the bed; and folds its hands on and off, and then takes hold of its hands on the belly, and removes the cushions underneath, until it is prepared to come down; and if the child does not jump, so takes its feet and moves them forth, then moves the belly up, then puts its hands in; and rocks the child on and off; and commands the woman to take hold as long as the child comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From childbirth when the child comes with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, so make the woman get up and go; if she cannot go, so make her lie down on the bed, and take away her legs forth; then administer the oiling that I have described; and if she does not give birth, so make her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and rock the child according to its natural shape, and let it be quieted, and command her to take hold as long as the child comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From childbirth on its neck, with spread-out hands and face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the ball holds its hand, then turns it little by little and lightly; and when it is even, so puts on the natural muscular power of aloes and oil, as we have said, then instructs it to move little by little; and when you have done this, so makes it sit on the siege, and instructs it to take hold; and makes it stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way to all the swelling, so cut the swelling at the fingernail, until the moisture is emptied; and if the child pours onto its face and neck, then cut it from the mouth, so that it is not retained, and kill the child; then put the child inside, as much as you should, and instruct the woman to take hold sometimes: then let it come out lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From childbirth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens frequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live at all, unless they are named; I know this, that they multiply and are separated by the sow's itch that divides them, which is tied to the skin; and sometimes they come out as naturally as others do, so we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out quickly, as the treatment we have said, and the bail is subtle, and does what it does soon and lightly; and does so that it moves towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the month I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of divine glory, and it is necessary that the bail knows everything, because similar things happen by chance; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman after giving birth to a stillborn or dead child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform manual work; then you must know if the woman is of good health, and has no accident or fears death; then the woman should be positioned on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister will give her a poultice of two parts, where she lies in bed so that she is not disturbed by the descent of the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with althea and fenugrec and flaxseed, then grease the baby's hands with these oils and those unguents; then pour them into the mother lightly, then take heed if the child appears to be descending onto its head; then place the onychas in her eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or under the chin or near the ribs, and if the descent is over the feet, then place or pin it to the sides of the body; and you must hold the onychas in your right hand, put the corset between your left hand's fingers, and pour all over your left hand lightly, and place the onychas in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to an empty thing; and this is the form of the onychas:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Afterward, place it opposite another one, or the third if you have need of it, so that the extractions are equal; and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, in order for it to come out, and let the needles hold it in place, just as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, then anoint the ball with some of its own oil and put it in that part, and stretch the other part; and if none remains, then place this needle or more higher up, and do this until everything comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back because of the constriction, then you must wrap it with a cloth so that everything comes out; then cut into the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do to the other hand, and also with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu peux; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the extraction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	Et s'il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l'estraies à l'enveloppe it sur la main; et fend le ventre ou le pis, tant que les moix qui i est corré; et si les autres membres sont osteit, et le chiez demoure, si bouche la baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusque à la bouche de la marris; puis i bouche l'once ou II, et le traie plus loin; et si la bouche de la marris est rétrécie pour apostème chaud qui i est venu, si n'y covient mie travailler, ains covient aménistrer choses moites et grasses; et l'aménistre emplastrés, et siece en eau mollifique et amoistante.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side and you can put him equal, so treat as we have said for a living child; and if one cannot, then treat it by parts, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the abscesses that we said come to the marriage; and if bleeding comes forth, it should be restrained with water, and other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly contained a dead child, then she consulted with another on top of it, and rejected the death of the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her mouth, and swelled up so much that it opened, and began to cause great perturbation.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on an emplaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days, another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly does not have bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wished to heal the wound, and in removing bones, as long as the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time thus, and sometimes took a little rest from that place; and I do not recall this chapter well except for this, that when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to intervene.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	and bring back the mother to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Next comes the shape of the pressure, with which one reads the books; and to the two turnings at the two joints of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist should be two palms wide, and the margin of the trees one palm and a half; and between the two hinges there should be two adjustments of this same fist, which are fastened on both sides by half a palm in length or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marriage to open when turning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	One other form, made more subtly and lightly like it, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pliers; and have two joints, just as you see, one palm long and two broad; and when you open the mouth with all the instrument, so set the woman on the bed, her feet apart and legs spread, then put the two joints together in the mouth and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have made the pliers equal, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marris, until the woman makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted and their similarities multiplied; and when the apothecaries have prepared them, then is the work more hasty and higher to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	So do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, because their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her blow softly with conditi, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose; and if she starts to cough because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, I take the pot, and make a pit or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the maris, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a cord or pit from the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the maris, and tie it so that the vapors come inside the maris; then make it vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the afterbirth comes out quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not fully cured, instruct the patient to wet her left hand in sesame oil or muscilage from althea, and then put it in its natural state, and want the secondine; and when she has found it, take it and stretch it a little bit directly, so that the maris does not resist extraction; but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull it out; and it will come out and settle.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Et if the mouth of the womb is narrowed, we have said the treatment to be loosening and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not as all that we have said, then take care not to proceed further; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the womb, you tie to the navel of the woman, then anoint her with quadruple medication ointment; so she will be helped and restored, and will come forth; but still, when she has given birth, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary to do fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have proved the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it appears like a dog's chain, and one puts the head in a subtle natural way, and wide shoulders above the fire; and let there be fumigations over the coals, and comb it until it is worn out, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the fontanelle pierced, but it is stopped by a subtle membrane: therefore it is necessary at the bath that she pierces that membrane with her own hand, and does not touch the surrounding area too much, and secure the bandage so it is not touched; then put a wet cloth on vinegar and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put in a hole a cord of cloth, and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes from sudden wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said of the cloth cord.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules which come from under the fundament are nodation, and grow greater than those which come from above the fundament to depart, or in the space of II parts, whether one fistula or more; and when that nodation is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture, either white or subtle, and sometimes these fistulas perish; and they are known by this, that there is evacuation, or egestion, or ventosity when the patient makes egestion, and by chance one bursts forth.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and reach just to the joint of the crotch, and just not to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula is perishing at the fundament, or not perishing: and it is that you insert your index finger or fundament into the fistula, and push a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twistiness, then I push a thin tent or horsehair into the fistula, as far as you feel the tent or hair at your fingertip; and if you don't feel it, and there is no evacuation, nor ventosity, nor discharge, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; therefore hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urinary channel, and it lets out urine, and cannot be healed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just to the joint of the hip, then the tendons are coming just to the place; if there is no twisting and the invention of pain around, then it stays thus bent, and there is no value in medicine or ointment by rubbing; and in these pus-filled ulcers there is no cure other than hard labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not pus-filled and not old, there is hope of recovery by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips sloping towards his belly; then spread a linen cloth or a plack if there is twisting, until you know where the tendon comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you should place your two fingers there, if he senses at once that the tendon has been pierced; and be discovered where you feel between your thumb and finger or flesh, then you know she is pus-filled; if not treated at all one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	On dist toutefois que l'on peut bien guérir quelques-uns, mais cela arrive rarement; et l'aide que l'on y fait, si est que l'on échauffe le cautère subtil selon la largeur de la fistule, comme il est devant dit; et le bouton tout chaud dans la fistule, tant qu'il vienne au-dessous du fondement; et fais-le deux fois ou trois fois, jusqu'à ce que tu saches que ces charres fautues soient brûlées, qui sont semblables à une plume d'oiseau; et puis le cure d'oignement enlevant char et soudant.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If so, otherwise he cannot be healed; and if the tent intervenes, and does not pierce all the way to the foundation that is at the bottom, and between your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or syphac, and you see the fistula in the direction of the covering of skin; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then apply the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and will fall; then remove those charred remains that resemble a bird's feather, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood swells up and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car the cauteries of fire assemble two things: that is to say, the burning of those joined bones, and the cessation of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of damp tents in butter or in broken cheese, until the pus flows out, and then the charred bone is issued into the pus; then cure the wound of ointments flowing from hard skin, and are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament and is far from the body, then insert your two fingers into the fundament and investigate this matter.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you sense the tent, and between two is the cloth or the sponge or bone, where it is about to pierce, unless there are fires that go only by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of three manners: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you scrape down to the foundation, or if you can put tents and cure it as first; and do not go too deep into the parfont, lest you cover the tenement which holds the foundation, and cause the egestions by way of unwillingness; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and then mind the bone that is faulty in the wound, as long as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it were a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes blisters are formed in this manner: and it is when you burst the tent in the blister, and it is on the side of the foundation beneath the skin above, so take a pierced tent at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I insert one twisted thread into two, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then take out the thread from that perforation, so that you burst your dough or foundation; and treat the top of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay for a day or two; and sometimes restrain it, until the filaments that are between the two break loose and fall out; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not puncture, then make it puncture in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not need to be cut so far down and then cured, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spinal thorn from which one makes a blister is very rough on one side and notched; but on the other side, it is not, because that's why you don't break what you shouldn't break, as you see here.
des emorroydes	of wounds
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in court there is blood, and there is one or more, and they come out from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture, and in court there is a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch so as to come out in chambers, until the foundations come forth, and the sons are seen; then hasten, and hold it with pincers, or grasp it at your finger, then cut at its roots; and if the linen cannot hold due to its moistures, take it by the napkin, or by a piece of cotton; and extract it to your hands, then cut, and powder on some hot powders that are in place for cauterization; or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter on cauterization, then cure other cures until they are clean; and if the foundations cannot come forth, instruct the patient to take a sharp purgative drink and bitter to cleanse what is within the foundation, so that it may come out openly; when the patient takes fright, and the sons have come out of the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you grasp it at your finger or with pincers, cut, then cure as we have said, until they are clean, and fear cutting by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit du large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noie le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I pour corriger la superfluité du sang; puis met sus le fondement drapeil moilliet en oile rosset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et commande au malaide qu’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cessés, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sainz.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the putrefaction of the devil or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is putrefaction of devils in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you treat a boil or a toenail with the bark on top which does not allow it to moisten; then treat it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot dry, start the scraping again stronger than before, until it heals outwardly; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Furuncle is a small abscess appearing outside the body and goes very deep; and never will it freeze, and one feels it as much dead from tremor, and comes to all the body, and more in the arms than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a cord made from an ostrich feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that cord on the abscess, until it girdles the abscess all around; then turn your hand so that the cord goes all around the abscess, and put it deep inside, and pull out the abscess from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, then do so with a cord of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and above, drawing it up.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	but do not pierce, in order to keep it at the two, and press down. And if you see fit, then cauterize the tremor, as is said before or in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of purgation
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a purge of silver or archaute, or melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to the way they are brought together.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of purgation, small and great, is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it has a fissure where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and it has two perforations on one side and one on the other; and the belly or womb should be covered with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around by small perforations, and there should be one space between each perforation, then pour into these perforations one thread of strong silk twisted ten times around, and assemble the belly as if it were a she-goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then poultice; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the poultice with oil or almond oil from a hen's egg, or something similar, then tie it lightly; then press on the minister with both hands together until he is completely covered, then remove the poultice, and lift the patient's legs to the ceiling, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it be as long as it can; and if he sleeps one entire night, it will be a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you purify him in a disease of rectal obstruction, and the medicine hastens to come out, then rebegin it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, so be the cysts also subtle as for a child; and it is the form of the subtle cyst above which the skin will be strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and from what things they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the hitting of stone, and cutting with sword and knife or lance or pole or arrow or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from hitting with stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you fear hot abscess: then make it heal as quickly as possible with cephalic remedies, especially if there's pus coming out of the wound, and let it heal on the opposite side of the injured part; and make the patient replenish with wine and thick foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not wish to be healed, then let his food be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put a poultice on the wound, if there is an abscess that comes, with a cloth moistened in rose oil or in vinegar; and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh to its very blood, and has not been moved by air, as I will say more about this later; and if the skin has been moved, then put some ointments on, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the cut of a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with suturing, just as I will say for belly wounds from suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and gapes, and holds only by a little, then scrape it off; next, treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of soft skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like poults, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a boil that is ripe and it has not reached the bone, so cut out the boil entirely, and let blood flow forth, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without fail, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so ligate the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and that is to put this powder which cures when air has changed it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and compress it firmly until it closes well and joins all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound unless it swells; for you do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one never does this with sulfur alone, unless one has no incense or dragon's blood, but only when the air has changed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess has opened up the wound, whether it was or not, so do not put this powder on it; but put some digested ointments, or poultices made of wheat flour and water and honey, until it discharges pus; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment alone and not put anything constricting, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let medicine be strong, just as chalk washes in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and washed away in sweet water, and other minerals in this manner, and moist anointings.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce or cut below that point; and if the artery is severed, and bleeding ensues, then bind it up, and apply a poultice, and cauterize as necessary; and if the spine of the throat is severed, or the kidneys, and the conduit is guarded, so that the flesh goes, then cut the kidney above the throat, and do not touch the throat but replace it according to its natural shape; and then restrain it gently, and leave it for some days, then cure with drying ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then search for it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot have, so that the wound may heal and be freed from its issue; and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are vapors rising from the wound and the patient fainting: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at the first hour nor bind it for the blood that does not congeal in the depth, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but put atractant ointment on it, and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck away moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasms, nor male tremors of the heart being torn asunder; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Then cure the wound and other treatments until it is healed; and if it cannot heal or work, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife and it is simple, or worse on the front or back, then treat that which is in front first; if it is large, by stitching; and if it is small, by powder, and if it is pressed into bone and has cut pieces, let the wound heal and the feverish parts will be relieved; and if they are not relieved, then let the wound suppurate, so that the extractions will ease; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are great and middle-sized and small; from a large wound, sometimes intestines or the bowels burst forth, which causes their intrusion; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one, because of this, we put more effort into slowly returning the intestines to their place, rather than doing so suddenly; for as soon as they feel cold, they swell and return to their place more slowly, and thus the middle-sized wound prevails; therefore we should gently restore the intestine to its place as with other wounds. And know that there are four kinds of ruptures of the belly: two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly, and two special stitches occur in other wounds of the body, and two other special stitches are common to all wounds; and although they are more proper for the belly, I will describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	When the wound is small, and nothing is out of place from within the intestines, and if it is a gentle thing to be put back in its place, this is done by one of two manners: or because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm him in this way: dampen a sponge or cloth with lukewarm water and only slightly heated, or cook in hot water with cypress, spikenard, and squinat, and apply the intestine until the swelling subsides; and sometimes do this by restraining and being mindful that one must only use it to reduce inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or boil and malt vinegar are cooked, because by this means the opening is freed from a small thing; and if it cannot enter, make a little incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut emorroids; and the first cure is mindful that one should not cut without great necessity being present; and these instruments for cutting are: if you cut inside the curve and do not remove anything, and look at this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine jumps forth, then return it to its natural form in its proper place, if you have power, for this is a cure.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and similarly if the gut wound is in one of the two parts, set your attention so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to arrange what I say about large wounds and such.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, take what you have available, then take a miserable-looking minister who holds all the rotting flesh in their hand and assemble the lips; and that is the common manner of stitching, and it's that you take one or several needles, depending on the size of the wound, and leave a space of about two fingers at the head of the wound, and insert a needle with a good strong thread; and pierce both sides of the leather with both sides of the siphac, which is under the leather inside, until you make it penetrate from that part, and assemble the four sides of the siphac together; then strain the thread around the needle in two parts, and assemble the two sides of the wound accordingly, and leave a space of about two fingers, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this until all the wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles can cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be moderate; and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and leather, lest they cut and open the wound before the healing; then cut off the edges of the needles so they do not harm the patient while sleeping, and put tents or cloths on the edges of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices to use one needle or two, and the second stitching method is common, which is that you assemble both sides of the leather and both sides of the siphac together on a needle with a moderate strong thread; and when you have pierced these edges all four together, then remove the needle from the part where you started, in the manner one cuts cloth; and leave a space of about the thickness of a little finger between each stitching, this is what people do, and I stitched up a wound on a man who had been wounded with a sword in his stomach, which was over a palm in size, and the intestines were well two palms in size, and the wound was in the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was closed 15 days later, and I cured it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where we could not find any, nor any medicines; and I put clean cotton on the wound two times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and push it through from outside to inside, until it has pierced the edge in its own direction; then lay the thread or seam where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce on the other side of the inner part from outside; and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch just as clothiers make clothes, and you leave once one end open, and then take up the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which Galen says properly, is like this: some people assemble the two parts naturally and apply one end of the silk to the other end in such a way: insert an awl or needle next to the mirror, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two ends of the silk; then turn the awl and make it pierce from the outer part all the way to the inner part, through the two ends of the silk; then make one and the other pierce from the outer part all the way to the inner part, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the manner of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and others testify to it, so one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew hides; and know that when the rupture is in the belly, then sewing is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: and is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the fire had moved it, so put back the intestine, and the cloth; then put on powder enchanting charm, and if the fire has moved it, put on some ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and tie the thread, and sew shut the suture, and the mirror; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, so put on, as soon as it begins to open, a old cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine except in some cases where the wounds are complex; and if you doubt that the wound does not form a community with the principal members, it is necessary to anoint lightly with linseed oil at warm heat or with rose oil, and place it around the edges, and below the shoulders; and if it feels pain or itching in the bowels, and many times occurs, then cleanse with black wine vinegar, and especially if the itching comes close to the intestines; and prick inside and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the dullness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach of its nature to those of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the vein jumps out of the wound, then set it back in place just like the intestine, when it is fresh; and if it is old and becomes white or black, then it is necessary that you tie up what is black, so that bleeding does not occur there, because there are veins and arteries; then cut off what is between the ligament, and put both ends hanging down from the part below the wound until the vein falls, and the wound bleeds.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, because I have seen a man wounded with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from there came the excrement and flatulence; I applied treatment accordingly as I could, and did not cease to sublimate until he was healed, and the ligaments were bound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take fresh thyme to great heads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thyme has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it strains its mouth upward; then cut off his head, and it will stay as if he cannot undo it, then put another thyme after in this manner as before, until the wound is completely covered; and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	That head [of thread] is sewn in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from the intestine of a beast, in this manner: take the end of this thread from the intestine that is very worn out, and then tie it to the head of this thread a subtle linen thread twisted, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and tie it off with a knot; and this method of sewing is not other than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it festers, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it bursts open and flows down.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the verdant nodulation that is hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it bursts open like a bird's feather; and sometimes it flows clear water, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, is only due to one of the nine causes: namely, due to the smallness of blood or body; or because it is evil; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much water; or the part is corrupted, and the material is bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow healing, and decays by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the syphilis, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous purification, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the place I have said, and you have faith in its cure, and you recognize it, then take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, then search for it; and if the fistula is twisted, then search for it with a subtle tent of cloth, because cloth bends around twistiness; and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it by one of the perforations, because the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it purifies; then bleed as much as you can, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and cut away the excess skin, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in some of the places I have said, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the faulty flesh and corrupt humors that are inside; and then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well opened at the right place, then it is necessary to cut away in depth, as much as you can, then put moist tents in medicine juice, and pour them just up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then put anointing ointments on healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves do not grieve or principal members; as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so let it remain until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things that take away flesh until it is clean; and if it is not clean, and returns to its former state, know that you are not yet at the bottom: uncover and search until you reach the depth, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus cleansed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep to proceed; you cannot get there; if it's just a little corrupted bone, and you can extract it with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, then extract them all, leaving none behind; and if moisture makes it hard for you, and there is no error or fear, so cut and moisten and remove the flesh, and deliver the bone.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you can't remove them within an hour, so put the dressing on the wound allowing it to suppurate and leave until the pus is all around the bones, and then they will have a lighter burden; and if it's a great bone, such as a leg or hip, so just treat the corruption until the abscess is entirely removed, then dress the wound; and if there is a large part of the corrupted tissue and it comes close to the bone; so you must cure and cover all the way to the corruption, and then care for it until it's bound; and I will tell you about an abscess that occurred in a man's leg, which you may take as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, until the matters came to the leg and he developed a large abscess, and there was no way to open it; but the physicians through their foolishness kept working on it so much that the abscess opened up and many materials came out, and became a fistula, and there were very many pits that all gave off pus and moisture from the body; and many physicians treated him for around two years, and there was no gain in the art of healing, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines he was being given, and what came out through the pits with great force; and the young man's skin became red and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these cavities, and then searched all the cavities, and found that some of them came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hastened, and cut into one of the cavities until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it to be rotten and perforated, and the rot came right up to the bone inside; I saw what appeared to me from the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except for that which I removed; and began to treat the wound with suitable medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; and then I began again, and uncovered the bone just as before, and found the rot continued in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and felt I should close the wound; but I couldn't do so until I cut around a palm's breadth from the bone, and pulled it free to its entire extent, then treated it with medicines; and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to continue the treatment except for the patient's weakness, who could not bear it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because of the blood evacuation it often happened that one bled freely, but he was healed entirely, and instead of bone there grew a hard flesh, and he was in good condition and had no harm or contradiction whatsoever from top to bottom, neither at going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it must be set in this way: take a linen strip and stretch it over the head of the bone that is exposed, and command someone to hold it high; and take another linen strip, thicker than the first one, and tie it on top of the flesh that is below the bone, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh beneath, and uncover the healthy flesh above where you see fit, so that the flesh does not get hurt; and put a hot iron or a wooden splint under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it must be set as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and set again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then put a hot iron under it, and then be sure to remove the corruption from one part to another, and make sure the long end of the corrosion fits as we have said; and if corruption is in the jointure, then cut off the corrupted jointure, and find the bone on the other side; and if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there will be no other way than to cut it; and if corruption is in the hand or foot finger, it is very strong that thing, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corrosion how it opens up to you; and purify it in all the ways you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you; and know that there are many instruments for cutting these bones, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, or par cause defuer; and when you have medicine for that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member down to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient may escape from death, or from the greater malice, which is more grievous than the default of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards it becomes purple, then the corruption spreads from member to member, and takes hold throughout the body; so hasten in covering, and if this is due to the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar things, then cover the head of the thigh, and do not give them space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, then cover at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cover at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of his virtue; and thus it is with all such corruption when it comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the second joint; and if it comes to the foot, then cover the whole foot; and if it rises to the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy except to hasten the patient's death. And the manner of covering or binding the member is as follows: you bind above and below, stretching out one strap down and another strap up, and leaving a space of one spatula wide between the two straps so that the bone is exposed; then cover or bind, and put a piece of linen on each side, so that the binding does not touch the healthy flesh, and thus comes to the patient another lesion and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the area hastily, or place some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my presence: he had a blister that seemed like burning fire, and that corrosion came first to his big toe, so much so that it consumed the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed; and long afterwards, the corrosion returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I put some reflective things on him after purifying his body, and he could not stop the corrosions; and he thought that I should amputate his hand, and I did not want to, for I had hope of recovering the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the virtues of the man were weak; and he became desperate altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have not told this tale except for the reason that it is done differently elsewhere when necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, and demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee of bowe; and puis ront and perceive, and in saut li bowe, and demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Et si tu as foi que le cuir s'arède, et la corruption n'est pas en profondeur, et le cuir est espès de chair, alors soigne-le par clistère ainsi: regarde si les seins sont grands, et le bowe qui en est est d'un puant odor, alors utilisez la médecine égyptienne faite ainsi: prenez ail, huile, litargire, également, et mettez-le cuire dans un vaisseau au feu, tant que la médecine soit rouge, et deviendra aussi épaisse comme le miel; et puis prenez-en selon ta nécessité, et faites-le en eau et miel, et en clistère pour le sein, et contraindre le pertus; et laissez la médecine ainsi pendant deux heures, puis l'estraie en éspérant; faites cela autant de fois que les seins soient mondifiés, et qu'il soit ôté le puor; et parfois clistériez avec eau de cendres, lorsque cette médecine n'est pas présente, et est-ce que tu prends des cendres de fust de vigne, et arrosez-les d'eau, puis coulez-le, et en clistère, tant que tu saches que les seins sont bien mondifiés; et si le malade ne peut souffrir, ni la médecine égyptienne ni l'eau de cendres, alors clistériez avec eau et miel ou il a un peu de litargire broié; ou vous clistériez de miel et de vin mélité, qui ont propriété de mondifier et de laver, et le vin fait adorer le sein; et quant tu as fait cela, et tu as foi que les seins sont bien mondifiés, alors clistériez avec ce qui fait naître char en lui, et est-ce que tu prends emplaustre diaphanique, et le fais avec huile rose et vin; ou vous clistériez avec certaines médecines et onguements, dont j'ai dit les propriétés ou traité des onguements; et si le pertus du sein est petit, et la canne de clistère ne peut pas y entrer, alors élargissez-le d'un fer un peu, et mettez-y une tente d'onguement égyptien, ou onguement basilicon, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit élargi; et si la plaie est trop large, alors laisse-la ainsi que le lieu où le clistère peut entrer, et si le pertus qui gît bowe est au-dessus, alors coupez-le ou placez-le plus bas.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bow is deeply inside, don't let it stay; and if you can't cover the breast underneath as you see, prepare in such a way that the bow runs to its lowest point; for when the bow is deeply inside, don't let it stay and if you can't cover the breast underneath as you see, prepare in this manner: so that the bow runs slightly downward and doesn't leave anything of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and spread a linen cloth over the entire wound; then cut into the forces at the spot where the nipple is more wide than the first one; afterwards apply ointment softly onto another cloth according to the quantity of the pustule, and place it on the pustule of the breast to ease the bow, and don't remove the large cloth until after several days once; and that which is on the pustule of the breast often removes for removing the bow, and knows what comes out of the bow, whether it's venom or pus or enough or digested or undigested; and be wary if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps onto the pustule of the breast, know that the breasts are now healed, and approach health; then loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest spouts undigested bowstring after many days, know that the chest is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose wounds take a long time to heal in their flesh, and those who do the opposite; and if indigestible food jumps out of the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not sound; and if the stomach is slow to digest and is blocked, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as ointment defines, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take defined ointment and mix it with rose oil and equal-sized vinegar; then cook and use it; and do the same thing to sweetened honey when defined ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and powder them on the honey when it is over the fire; then glue it onto a cloth and place it on the stomach; and sometimes administer aristologe for a long time, and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like wheat flour and cinnamon; and use simple or compound medicines: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has entered deeply and makes an impression in the bone, or hardens the members, or causes swelling.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the lung
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance arises in other places; and when it is elderly and one does not take care, then the abscess bursts, and flows so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and perhaps even all the way to the end; and comes the corrosion just up to the bone, as long as there is painful pain, and the joints of the toe are wide, and the color is fiery.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you scrape away all the superfluous tissue remaining from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, then it is necessary that you place the cautery under the nail that pricks the flesh, and pour it on top, and scrape away that subtle and gentle flesh, and put on the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it out and draw forth, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint corrupted, then cut it out from there just as has been said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is festering, and bleeding, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary to heal it first; then cut out the bone at the spot of the spatula, cutting across above, and take care that the cut does not come near the flesh which is below the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it has happened, then place something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are entirely fleshly, and sometimes there is a bone or an ossicle, and sometimes one is born at the root of the joint, or else the birth is in some other bones of the joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Whoever is born in any not of the two days does not move, and whoever is born at the jointure of the two days, by chance moves; the stature of that which is fleshy so is light, in such a manner: it stands in its root like a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one that arises in the root of the joint is hard to cure: you should hesitate to cut it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In whoever is born or due to the last night, it is necessary that you cut off the skin around there just up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread to this, then cure until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come on the hands together come by birth, or by swelling of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut the soldering, so that it may be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so it does not solder; or put between two thin pieces of plank, until the joints are soldered, as it is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If any swelling comes to one of his feet with the palm, then strike that swelling as is fitting.
des vils	of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are swollen and distended with superfluous and melancholic fluid that comes to many members of the body; and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him sometimes purging with hellebore, and then the healing of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you cut and drain the black blood; and the other manner is that you tie the vein and drain it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is according to this manner: first rise the leg of hot water very strongly until the black blood is thinned out, then strain the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the hip; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut, then lift it up and drain entirely the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can endure; and then tie it, and command that he take food gradually drinking black broth; and recommence evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and it will be harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: Raise the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs, then put it in the bath, and make the leg warm with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins; and if you don't have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cut into the vein at the length to the chief of the ankle, or in the part below the knee; then cover the skin with oil, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems as white as a cord; then put the thread below, until it is raised out of the skin, and then gently lift it to another needle, just as you did first; then cut into another shape, or more if you need, then lift it, and cut into the toe of the foot, then train and lift just up to the second shape; then pull from shape to shape, until it is all done, then cut; and if you cannot pull and lift, then put a needle on every strong double thread, and tie and lift, and put below the thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until there is enough; and be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, one cannot pull or lift, and it will cause harm to the patient; and when you have pulled all of it, then put a moist cloth on the place of the wound in vinegar and rose oil; and cure until he is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it askew, but do not cover it up; and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one covers the eye is curved, and does not cut, lest it open the vein; and it is a thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would pierce the vein, but be gross as we have said, and this is the shape.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is sutured in the legs, in hot places where there are no herbs or tree, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the purging that comes from beneath the skin, as serpents and worms are sewn between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this inflammation are that a very great swelling comes in the leg, then the flesh changes, and the inflammation begins to come out, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the swelling opens, it's necessary that you wrap around it with a piece of cloth about one and a half to two fingers thick, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it becomes flat again at the back, so wrap around the cloth, and tie; and if it's too long, then cut off part of it, and wrap around the remaining bit, and don't cut it off at its root until it's all gone; for if you cut it off, it will go into the flesh and bring forth an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad disease; therefore it's necessary that it be treated little by little up to the top, and nothing remain inside the body; and sometimes this inflammation is when it's treated after five or ten fingers' length, and one man came to me, whose it issued from ten fingers' long, and when you cut it off, it bursts forth in a boil or pus, and perforates right down to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and the matter inside is emptied out, and medicines are administered to prevent putrefaction some day, then the cure is done just like with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at times to this vein many raindrops, and indeed when it appears in the joint of the foot or the foot itself, and there comes a great deal of pus, and hence it jumps; then heal it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vermin that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often afflicts oxen, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, and one can feel its presence as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it wants to go and bursts forth; and it is caused by some humors being corrupted, such as those of vipers, serpents, lice, and worms in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it reaches the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and drawn, one cannot do anything else except when it goes: so then you should tie the above and below with a strong cord tightly, then cut above and draw forth, and if the vein is pierced deeply into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire on top, until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it flows to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye's head, then bind below him a circle tightly, then cut above, and draw forth; and it is necessary to use the patient with cleansing of body medicines soluble for bad humors purged, and be wary of food in digestion.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and I looked after, the swelling rose also like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran all over the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it was turning around the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had thought to myself that it was best for the pain to move from one place to another, but I did not want to, as I saw in the woman; and I thought to myself that this was because the woman's body was dry, and her veins uncovered, and therefore that constriction appeared; and they did not think according to this reason those who are well-fed, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, so bind above and below quickly, then strike above until constrained by ventosity to go back; and cauterize the place; and if you don't see it to your eyes, so cure with those who counteract ventosities, such as fetid pills, and serpent pill, and similar others.
des saiettes	from arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversities of these are that some have large points, and small, and sharp, and heavy; and some with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and one that falls into any member so falls in two ways: or in principal member it pierces, as brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, warn you: so you must beware of extracting this arrow, for many die after; and when this bad sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not yet deep inside, so you take it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the spine that is above the brain shoots out, is when you have scotomia and numbness and stiffness and redness in your eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a loss of sense from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps the word and voice are impaired; and the wound is moist and white like pustules, and bursts forth as if it were bruised flesh; and if this sign warns you, then hold off from the cure, and take out the arrow if it's not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or hits the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard and not empty; and by chance the arrow moves just like the hairs, and there is a flow of cold black blood, and chillness and pale sweat, and fainting: know then without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow when the liver is affected is that without foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he sighs deeply and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the ribcage, it is below the small ribs; and he spits up a great deal and suffers great pain and sighs; and all the muscles of the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food jumps out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and a thread of fine matter comes out through the intestines, there is no hope for cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows away, and the patient feels very strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and arms and neck and shoulders and aiditory and spine of the back and forceps and cuneiform bones and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, for this reason do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one man that an arrow struck him in the armpit near the root of the nose; I tried, and pulled it out on the other side under the fatty earlobe, and he was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out an arrow that had struck him in the fatty part of the eye under the eyebrow, and the arrow was bent, and I couldn't pull it out except for a small point towards the fist, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bowstring, so light to handle without ears; the gamester was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And pull out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab in earshot: I saw the beards, and pulled it out as far as I could, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And pull out an arrow from the home, that was stuck in his belly, and thought he was dying; and then when he had passed 30 days, it did not change its condition; I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if the arrow hit a man on the back, and was sewn up above; and the arrow stayed inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was sewn up; and it stayed like that without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And draw an arrow to the home of the prince's king, which had fallen near the newborn child, and was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was called to the treatment after it had fallen three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I searched for it with all subtlety, and did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I put on the spot an ointment attractive and digestive because the skin did not swell; and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the ointment on for many days, and the wound was healed above, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his newborn child; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days, until it was fully open, and I tried it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead which was stuck in place; then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the arrowhead became visible; and it took more than 4 months to surpass, and then escharred so much that I put forceps on it, and pried it open from both sides, and it could not come out; then I did not cease subtletying and ingenuously inventing with instruments, until I took one day as the forceps were well done, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored; I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely well.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or t'ai dit la qualité de l'extraction d'aunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne peut mie tout apprendre; mais li sages maîtres compère sur bien point grant chose, et sur ceu que li est présent et défailant, trouve une nouvelle œuvre, et neuf instrument, au descentement des choses étranges qui adviennent en cet art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the members or are fixed in place only according to two manners: either by the way they enter or by another part; and that which jumps forth on the side where it enters is an arrow entering through flesh, and jumps forth sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump forth now, let it stay as long as the flesh is around it and the exit is open; and also if it's fixed in bone and can't come out, let it stay like that for some days, and move each day; and then it will jump forth, and if it doesn't, then pierce all around with a very fine point, until the surrounding flesh is stretched, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said are apparent to the patient: then do not pull it out at all, but let it stay until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the surface, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come just to the surface, and the patient remains some days without bad accident, then they should beware of pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's stuck very deeply and can't come out otherwise, I administer poultices around it, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is repositioned in its place within the body and cannot be seen, then seek out all means to extract it; and if you can feel it, then use a suitable instrument to pull it out; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then wait until the wound is large enough; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has ears where it holds fast, then remove the flesh that is stuck in for 2 parts as far as you can, and then break or bend the arrow's ears so that you can pull it out; and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, lest you pull it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't pull it out at once, then lay it alongside the wound until it's properly prepared, then pull it out, because the extraction is eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Et if the bleeding causes you distress, then follow what we have said in its chapter; and beware of cutting into the nerve and vein, and think how you can draw out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and put the patient as he was when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from the other side, or if it does not touch him, or the skin is swollen in front where you can see or feel uncomfortably: cut then above, until tongs can take hold of it, and then pull it out; if it springs back now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and start the extraction again until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is stuck, push it all the way through; and if the shaft falls off, and you see that it needs to be bound up, administer a binding instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; then push forward, and if the arrow is extracted, then bind the instrument at the point entering in, in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, so it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits or falls on the thigh, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close by, and you can cut above it, then cut there; and beware of cutting the vein and nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary; and cure until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and behold the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: great, small, and petty, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the wooden point is like the feathers of a bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the forceps for pushing and for grasping if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the body common.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one gets cured, of which there are 16 on the head, namely: two batons that are behind the ears, which are called "herbech"; and two arteries that appear in the two temples; and two veins that are in the eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and one vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and one vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two grooves that are on the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips below the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which we commonly draw blood are four in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it is located on the left side; and people call it "vein of the head". The middle one is called "fascia", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; and people call it "vein of the heart". And the basilic vein is on the right side, and people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the elbow joint, and that is the one from which we draw blood, which clearly shows itself above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the ulnar and radial veins, and it has two branches. And in the leg and foot are three veins: one is located below the garter of the left side; and the second, called "sophene", which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse" that is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Li sainie des voinnes qui sont après les oreilles si aide aux catharres anciens, et à émigraine; et li qualitéis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu révèles le chef du malade, et frottes le lieu où les veines sont d'un drap aspre; puis estrignes le malade son col à une vis, tant que les II veines apparaissent derrière les oreilles en deux lieux dépendants du chef: quier les donques à ton doigt, et ou tu sens le pouls sous ton doigt, si signifie d'encher; puis prends la lancette, et la bout par-dessous la veine jusque'à l'os, puis leve ta main à tout la veine amont, et coupe et le cuir et la veine bien deux doigts du travers, et fais sortir du sang tant que tu vois; puis l'estrain et lie, tant qu'elle soit saine; et j'ai déjà dit l'incision et le cautère ou premier livre.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein in ancient diseases such as face sickness and migraine, and in headache; and its quality is that the patient strains their neck twisting so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or other thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein so that it is clean and not once flows a wide stream.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary for the flames to be too thin; and the healing takes place obliquely, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the eyebrows helps the eyes, and pustules, and headaches, and eye disorders in the eye, and face diseases; and the quality of their bloodletting is that the patient strains their neck twisting without any connection, as before; then let it bleed, and be the blood of the traverser, a little bit long, a little bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they will break; then make the blood flow until you need it, and then put it on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding from the neck vein is very valuable for the treatment of ague, and for feverish sickness, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is old; and the qualities of the bleeding are that the patient constricts their throat, then strains their neck to the left hand side, and takes the subtle flame long, and sets it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will start running now; and do not go too deep and make the bleeding stop according to your need, then bind it at night, for it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the bleeding.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding from the two groins is very helpful for the constriction of the uterus, and for the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for empetigo, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and ulcers; and the qualities of the bleeding are that the patient constricts their throat above one side and then the other, as we have said; and let the master be sitting on the head of the patient, and the patient sit in a siege, then let them bleed the vein from long a little bit widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as needed; then do it again on the other side, then release the ligament, and strain out the veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins above the lips helps with hemorrhage in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing is to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and know them by what they are black, and by what small dark lines surround them: cut then one and the other, and if you don't know, and you are in doubt, then cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the healing of under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the cephalic healing, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healer is to make the patient sit between your hands in the sun, and lift up the tongue, and look under each side a black vein: heal then one and the other, and don't go too far down, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the throat which are commonly cleansed are cleansed in two manners: either piercing them with a wide, fiery mercurial instrument or an olive-green subtle one like cutting instruments; and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are freely flowing with thick, apparent blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-green fiery instrument.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The savior of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are under the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the belly; and it is necessary for the healer to bleed severely, and to beware of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is cut and a flow of blood comes forth, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not be piercing with fire, but cutting like anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	Et se li basilique n'apert manifestement, so it's necessary that you extract it, and change another one; or if you want any relief from it, or save the life of it through the vein in the arm: it will appear manifestly; and close the opening with a gentle touch, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the site of the pulse, so it's necessary then that you extract the arm, and touch the site until you feel the beats; then mark the site with a sign, and bind the arm, and close the opening with a gentle touch; and beware that you don't hit the artery when you see the site inflamed, for it is an artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it flow upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from an artery: hasten then, and place your finger above for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm, and leave it so, and do not move the patient until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped, and it flows, and the remedy is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head will retreat; and stop the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Et take a rind of fig tree, and split it, and take one half and tie it on well just to the other side; if the wound stays clean, that's good; if not, cure it with the powders that stop blood; and the stopping is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound and the power of the arm of the hand.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the vein in a mixture so helps that it stops blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful about the nerve which is below, and if it is pushed too deep and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the blood flow is grievous, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then you must use the veins of the instrument again; and hide the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The wound of the cephalic vein so helps that it takes blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is necessary to heal by pricking with olive oil or myrrh oil, for this is the most saving of all veins, because there are no nerves or arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and not trouble anything if one does not take at first, and then begin again; and by chance some people's joints swell, so that one must take at first, but it does not trouble anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about healing is that healing is not done except to preserve health, and to prevent diseases from coming; and the healing should be done in one of the three veins that are said to be suitable: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and it is necessary to heal at the beginning of prayer time, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it is necessary to heal on the first or third day, after two hours or three o'clock of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sickly one who is ministered to for illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather whenever need arises, in all hours and at all times; and it is not necessary to heal children up to 14 years old, nor a woman bearing fruit that is less than seven months old.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should elderly people who have passed 60 years not be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be healed, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they purge their intestines with a light enema if they have many phlegms retained, so that the veins do not retain superfluous fluids that are harmful to the principal members; nor does one heal who is too greasy from meat, or drunk, until he has been sober for some time; nor those who are swollen from water retention; and then beware of healing after a colic passion, vomiting, and decorruption of the belly, and frequent coition with a woman, travail, vigil, and fasting; and whatever is evil in all virtue, or by something in arm or body; then temper the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so; then enter into the bath, unless something prevents it, to subtlety the blood, and heal from the vomiting around the third day, as we have said; and take care that day of work, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be merry and joyful, and let the healer be higher than the one who is being healed, and stroke the arm twice or three times, then loosen the ligament in moderation, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow; and then stroke the limb with your hands until the veins swell, and one can feel them; then moisten the healer's palm with a little old oil, then place their left hand on that swelling under the limb where they want to heal, so that the swelling does not fail at striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, and si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, and ne puet ovrir li voinne, and ensi est on de ceus; and s'il aouvre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens at first time, that's good; but if not, then start again a little below or above that place in haste, unless the veins are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the wound is swollen, and the patient is frightened, let it be left for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps there will come an abscess quickly; nor enter the bath, then resume treatment if it pleases him; and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtilly, and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you see, trust in that same opening for all the flame directly; and work somewhat hastily, before the swelling is gone; for this has often happened when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the swelling, then do not continue the incision, and put some oil of lily on top, because it lightens the body's blood, and is a nourisher in this place where the oil lies; and thus administer the oil of lily to each incision that you make in the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same thing makes triple and bowels swell, when one puts it on the swelling; so subtlety the skin and disperses when it is too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not sutured until the next day or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put a moist sponge on the swelling in water and silk, warmed up a little, and keep it for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has drained from the vein, and if it remains at the swelling after some days with any blackness or greenish color, then it will not harm; and if you see, put on some aloes or myrrh dissolved in a calamine ointment, to show.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and swelling appear at the stitching of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the part soft to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put anything on it of what we have said, for by chance there may be a constriction in the artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the part, then care for it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each bloodletting according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is weak and helpless, and has need of bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the bleeding be more abundant; and for the one who is feeble, do the opposite, and make him well soon and often, and he should be healed by cutting across, not by piercing; and this manner of healing saves from the harm of bleeding and the paining of nerves, and is worth more than the healing done long or widely.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body is inclined towards bleeding, it is necessary to give moist bread soaked in apple pome juice; if he is overheated, then treat with bloodletting three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, then dampen the moist bread beforehand with a sweetened syrup made of honey and aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and the syrup should be well-scented.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it pales to the vein, after the issue of much blood, so it is necessary that he drinks a broth made from fat, and a fragrant subtle syrup, and uses the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to vent his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to vent his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to heal from another side, then he should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood inside the body that is already heated up and brings on fever; so it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and expand the opening as far as possible; then you must reward all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on his pulse when he is recovering, lest death come in place of recovery, and this happens many times when the nurses are neglectful; and it is not necessary when you see the arm being untied, and blood issuing for the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly then; nor if it is curved, should you stretch out the arm hastily, for that would be bad; but leave it until he recovers again; or you will point to the tip of the flame, as long as the congealed blood at the vein outlet issues forth, and place a poultice of silk on it and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity demands the bleeding of blood the second time, then let him bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is stitched instead of the head vein because it is compounded.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	Et the manner of healing is such that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the whitish film becomes red; then it should be tied moderately so that the vein appears well, and now the healing begins through the middle, not through length or width; and the pores should be wide, and the healing should occur close to the joint of the hand, and if there is no exit, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it's summer, don't put the hand back in hot water, for it's more suitable for winter than summer; and this healing is safer from all other healings because there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of the saved vein of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is how to do it: strain the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is drained, so that you can see; and if the wound is healed across, and you cover it completely, then nothing grieves; and don't go too far down into the depth, because the nerves are underneath all denuded of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let out the blood as far as necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to cauterize it quickly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The surgery of the right hand is equal to the illness of the left mouse, and does the same as I told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the sophene is worth to all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its sickness are that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs it on the vein as long as it flows, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many drops; thus it cures either a larger drop or at the ankle, which is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you make the incision on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below, and make the incision also as when cutting; and let the flames be evenly placed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the treatment fails the first time, it starts again a little above the previous one, because the heel is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus treat the sophene of the other foot in like manner.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its surgery is worth the pain of the haunch when it's for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of his blood are such that the patient should enter the bathwater and twist the bandage four times above the anklebone, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then heave with all your might in every way you can, and crossingwise; and it is better to have it cut than to leave it alone, because the swelling is great and it has been inflamed for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't bind it well, then let the blood flow freely from the opening on the back of the foot and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and do so much that you see the blood flowing, and then loosen the bandage and put a piece of cotton on top to stop the bleeding.
des sainies de ventouse	of blowings of the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Poultices are made of horns, or tin, or glass; and poulticing is done in two ways: either by wounding and attracting blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping glass bleeding which is done without wounding is according to two manners: either it is done with full heat or without heat; and the cupping glass bleeding that is done by wounding and extracting blood is done in 14 places on the body, where some are at the head; and others in the neck; and two in each side of the neck; and those below the chin; and those on the shoulders; and those in the armpits; and those on both arms; and those on both legs; and those on both ankles; and this bleeding does not treat with blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore one should not weaken it too much, as is done in vein bleeding; and it is not necessary to have it administered, whether at full heat or without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body has been purged.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to purge due to illnesses or habits, let us administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between; for there are those who, when they need to purge, have a heavy head; and those who turn yellow and red on their face, and in their head, and neck, and darken their eyes; and those who turn a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and redden with blood; and those who think, and see through their own blood and injured and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to poultice after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The juice of the mulberry so helps with headache relief that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body's waste; and this purging is in place of the cephalic remedy, and it is not suitable for those who have a cold complexion or who have catarrh, for this does great harm to them; and therefore it is not suitable for old people or those with cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often cure themselves with it, then become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to put the poultice a little lower down because of the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located between the sinew of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is worth it for the constriction of the belly, and for the rupture of the channel of the womb, and everywhere, and for repletion; and one must put little force into it, because if it holds too tightly, it will injure the throat or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosations are between the two costal bones of the neck, and they are worth it for the pains of the head, and for obtalmie and emigrainne, and for strangulation, and for the pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is located in the sinew of the basilica; and one must instruct the surgeon to express his hand so that he does not compress the artery, and let blood flow freely.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The poulticings under the chin are worth it for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the surgeries of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The poulticings on the shoulders are worth it for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations of the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it takes blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to make a cut too deep, for the place is bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the rump is worth to hemorrhoids of the foundation, and to diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be made of earth, so that it may well draw out; and by chance, if they were subtle, they would break; and it would cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups of the legs so heal manifestly, for they draw out blood from all the body, and are worth to ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urine, and restore flowers; and they are located on the two Sophene regions, and the two ankles, although they weaken the body after long use, and bring forth numbness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put on the suction cup is that you first put it empty, and suck in a timely manner, and then place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the red and swollen area, and appear the redness of the blood; then cease, and remove the suction cups, and take heed to the condition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and somewhat deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtlety the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out some little by little, we suffice only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	Et si nous voulons beaucoup de sang, alors nous recommençons souvent. Si le sang est épais, alors fermons-le par fond, et les termes sont tels que les clous soient percés soudainement, et il convient à celui qui a un gros cuir et dur, et qui ont des pores étranges, que tu oignes les lèvres des ventouses d'huile apéritive et dissolutive: si c'est en été, d'huile violette, ou d'huile d'amandes douces, ou d'huile de semence de courge; et si c'est en hiver, d'huile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblable.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, then it is not necessary to apply oil, but rather to wash after the ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or pear water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And one who has a lot of moisture, should get up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d'aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d'anet ou de camomile, ou d'autres semblans;
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who are sick and choleric, and whose blood is too abundant and inflamed; so it is necessary that he take cold things, such as green grapes, endives, and lettuce at ease, and similar things; and eat little, and meat of goat, and moist flesh.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, so take honey syrup and aromatic wine that is between old and new, and eat little, and eat small birds and young fowls; and the day when he will ventouse himself, so he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some people treacle or muscat before or after ventosation to comfort the main members; and let the blood be subtle, but it does not need those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without hurting are those that are applied on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the stomach and abdomen and bowels and haunches, because those members do not suffer being hurt in one place, and it is only done to attract blood from member to member, as we put cupping glasses on the breasts when the milk flows; to remove viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the stomach and abdomen to reduce the member; and it removes pain when there is inflammation or boil, and by its attractive power it may accidentally stop the inflammation, or drive the boil from its place; and thus it does when one applies it on the liver and kidneys when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck in as much as possible; and sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with lukewarm water, just like in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or with herbs that are suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, and hath it two inches of pure font, and ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, as for to thrust an awl, and be of iron, soft before so that it doth not wound the patient when putting on the member; and ait em mileu une verge de travers d'arain ou de fer, in order to put a candle enclasp, and be both great and small according to the sicknesses and age of those who take them; for the poultices of children are other than of old men, and of thin ones than of fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must put this poultice on the member thus: take the wax or linen wrapping, and put it in the poultice through the stick that is in the poultice, so that the light be at the bottom of the poultice lest it burn the patient; and then put it on the member, and the two inches should be above the pertus we said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes forth, and take off the poultice; and wrap the linen as before, and continue doing this often if need be.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the poultice then which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, to all ages, there is no stick nor perforation, and it is not applied except when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member only so much; and that's how it is.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Unhealed wounds are not applied to except in members where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare bones, such as those of the hand or neck, and others similar; and the quality of the user is that when you find wounds that are in sweet and clean water without bruising, then take them; and put one in a sweet water bath, until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cured with wine and poultice, then rub the member so much it becomes red, and put on the unhealed wounds; and when they are full and swelling, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put it, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the limb easily and then with water, very well, and then bind it; and if the bandages are too tight around the body, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it until the swelling subsides; and if the swelling is much increased, apply powdered vitriol or gallstones and similar things until it subsides; or you put half a handful of peeled fava beans on the limb, and leave them there until they are absorbed by the limb, and then it will subside; and if you need more, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the bandages do not want to take hold, rub the limb with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the swelling goes down, and then apply them; and as soon as they feel the blood, they will be absorbed; and when you see that they are dripping, powder on top a little bit of alum and silk broom, or ash, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a treatment for fracture and desolation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish doctor falls from this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read letters; and because of this reason is the science strange in our land, for I have never found good one; and I know nothing except by the science of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have reduced the science to writing, and through experiment, and through the habituation of my life; and I have described what is contained here in this chapter, and abridged it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are prepared, just as I did in these two chapters beforehand.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore fitting that we say the prologue to this book, which contains the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when breaking or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, you should hasten to heal the patient on both sides, unless something hinders it, such as weakness of the body, or youth, or old age; or if the time is not too cold or too hot; and beware of cold fevers, that is to say, chills, and flesh of goat and hare, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a hot aposteme, or an expansion of matter in the member; then let the patient return to their previous governance as they are used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if they have viscosity, such as boiled wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and peas, and pork belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and rich wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with great nourishment the bones are restored more quickly and the fracture is healed sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature pour la sechor des membres ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre si com os de petis enfans; mais n'a cure ramoinne sus l'os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s'aert et joint le membre ensamble tant qu'il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre et pour ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes si com nos avons dit.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is one thing and the fracture of the belly or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that occur by being struck, and others by being crushed, such as the cutting of a feather to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And then there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture in a small split or crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And at every manner has its own device and proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory comes into place; and it is known that the break of the bone by what the joint is twisted, and appears well by deficiency, and sounds under the pressure of the hand; and when there is no twistiness or sound to touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break; but it can have twistiness, or a crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So you must not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come next, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Et saiches que the breakage that goes in arvol, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them back into place equally, so that abscesses do not arise; and if abscesses come, let it stay for a day or more, until the abscess is appeased; then put it back into place as you can easily and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of one where there are pieces; then strain it, as it is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and you need to straighten two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or at your hand it is small members, or at two tendons, or one tendon and at your hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then reunite by all means the additions in their places as you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain; and align well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: so straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who cause by their work abscessed heat and contraction in the member, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, thus chastise well the patient that he not move it, nor while watching nor sleeping, nor turning nor in any other way; and take care that the member be so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put him in such a condition that he does not feel any pain; and take care that he be set straight, so that there are no twists when he is restored; and the qualities of the broken member are as I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: thus it is necessary to wrap them in soft and subtle linen drapes; and for those that are large, such as thighs and calves: thus it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because the wide bands encircle all the great member and hold it equally tight from all sides, so that there is no crease; then tie around lightest stitches, three or four according to the member, and strain your hand slightly on each band, then go up to the break and strain less, so that the break will move away a bit; and soften the band slightly and slightly, until you take a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another band and wrap around again from above over the broken limb; then go down to the part below the break and hold it moderately, not too tight nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above; then put linen or drapes between the bands, until they are all even, then tie everything up with a ribbon, and then put well-made stays on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or swelling, he sets something calming on top of the abscess hot and which takes away the swelling, and leaves it like that for some days; then strain onto those stars, and let them be half a width of a large cane, or of fir wood from which one makes clefts, or of palm tree sap, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the star you put on top of the break be a little bit bigger and wider than the others; and let it be as long as it needs to be for the limb of small or great size; then strain onto the stars just as you did at the first stage, then tie above with a thread in good order, just like at the first stage on top of the break; tighter it is above, sooner it will be less so; and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; for if the thread is thick, as I have seen with the works of foolish people who make their own strings from twisted flaxen cord, and that is a great error, for the string cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not necessary that there be less than two fingers' width between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the straining in their healthy parts, then put under them cloths of linen or felted wool, so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to set splints on all the broken members the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Car when the members are great, there is no need to put them in place more than after three days or seven, or more according to your security about what happens happening; and behold here the manner of ancient ointments to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take wheat flour that remains on the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the ointment restoring breakage in many dispositions, and especially for women and young children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: take aloes and ladani and inula and assefeitide and gum arabic and mugat, each 10; myrrh and aloe, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder, and mix it with many eggs; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is valuable to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of ointment that is worth for twisting: take mugwort and marjoram, anise seeds X parts; myrrh and aloes, IX parts; dragon's blood VI parts; Armenian balm X parts, and grind well, and mix with water or an abundance of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to plaster joints and bones out of their places, and to soothe the pain occurring, and use the bone, and the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in ale and cooked oil, and put it on the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not heal entirely, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of terrestrial papyrus, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and to ease the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, vetch flour, each in equal parts; and pound, and mix with wine, and apply to the members if they are heated, or mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Pren racines of vismalve, and seed of flax, balaust, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomile, from each one part; and grind, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with a cerot made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and horsehair of sheared men or bird feathers, and vervain, in equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not loosened by hands days. If pain comes to the place, or pruritus, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the emplastrum now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge from the sea, and plunge into water, and lift up the place, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, damp in water or rose oil, and bind with a nut, as long as you are sure of no hot aposteme; and repose the inflammation of the member, and may the pain be gone, then recommence the subtle binding, and a little emplastrum, and do not strain it so hard as before; and subtilize until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is gone and red and painful and swollen are all removed from it, and you need to plaster and bind, then start again in the same way as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Et s'il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s'aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j'ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n'est, saiches que norrissemens n'i puet venir; arose lou donques d'aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c'est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n'i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l'ovrer droitement.
des diverses manieres de brisure	The various ways of breaking [injuries]
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of breakages are, and various figures, and the causes are destined; for there are breakages that are made by percussion of a sword, and the collarbone is stripped bare to the socket which is below the bone, just as a hatchet or axe does; and therefore this type of breakage is called "hachure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and is called this kind of breakage "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakages is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is an embedded percussion, or a splitting, or a blow from the fist of stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it is a persistent breakage which approaches just to the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is glued to the bone as subtly as a mouse, and it is a small fissure, and therefore this breakage is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by piercing with an arrow, or by falling, or by similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter downwards, and the bone is shaved like blacksmiths do when they hammer on furnaces; then the arrow goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have moist bones, like the head of an infant; and it happens to all these types of breakages where small pieces are dislodged as they are; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of breakages by their subtraction above them, and the inquiry into their tents, and through the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it gently above, then opens up the black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of blood, loss of intellect, swelling, palpitation, fever ague, and the flesh issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day at the latest that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, so that the membrane below the bone is corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	Et if the break in the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut through the broken part thus: and this means that you take hold of the patient's head wounded, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and above the shape of the wound as gentle as you can, and if bleeding comes out to reveal the bone, or an abscess forms, then the aid of what is needed comes; and this means that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be assured of no further bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is to cut straight ahead, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another shape larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have diverse shapes, some being narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of untempered iron; and work lightly, lest you wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and rough, then you must pierce around it, so that you give shapes with rasps, not too deep lest they go beyond the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a margin or one circle, so that the point does not go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each becomes its place in the shape of the bone, so that you have rasps for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of rasps:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one rasp on the bone and turn it in your hands until you know the bone has been pierced; then place the rasp elsewhere a little further, and do this all around, then file away the incisors of the bone which is between the ridges, and make it more subtly than you can, lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand or to one of your tools like pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you remove the fragments that remain of the bone to all other instruments resembling a chisel, but it must be more sharp and subtler than the other chisels; and if there remains nothing of the small bones or no scales, then gently extract them with the same instruments; then cure the wound by using tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which the Gauls say, which is more sound; and they love it very much, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, and this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut off at one end, and the parts are aligned in two directions, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chop around the entire bone, and take good care to guard the skin that is below; if it becomes attached to the bone, gently lift it, for one lifts well without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is filed away only on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to remove scales with a subtle scraper which you should have in various quantities, so as to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	So start with large scrapers, and then move on to more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like and subtle breakages, it is necessary that you administer according to its direction; and this is something that is not known to him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the abscess is open, it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as gently as possible so that you do not harm the abscess, then administer above the other layer, and do not strain it too much except until it keeps the wound alone; and leave it thus for a day or two, until the swelling is pacified, then release it, and administer medicines such as roots of linden, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make powder of these things, and place it on the wound, and administer again without application of ointment; and beware that the wound is soon clean, lest you leave off anointing, nor let the edges assemble, for when the edges assemble above the skin of the head, they flow and burst forth, and great harm comes to the patient; for when one puts something biting on the abscess, it bursts open above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore take care then, if any bad accidents befall the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no other remedy that comes from the medicine we have applied on it, which has such virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix one drachm with it; then apply it to the spot where the boil is; then treat it in the ways of cures that are necessary, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one on its own, because these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must take your little finger or a small reed, and put that break inside your finger's nail, and straighten it slowly, until the nail returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the neck and cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rod slightly large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do it again, and hasten to restore the first part, if you can; if not, after seven or ten days, when the abscess has cooled down, then straighten the tip of the nail with a linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put another on the other side, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the perturbations of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said some physicians that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that it is good, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture of egg white and flour powder; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the ligaments are tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one places a bottle or eggshell instead of tents, and if it has a single soft draping around, and holds the breeze, and blows on the patient among them; or does what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess forms nearby while you are working there, then put a poultice or damp cotton cloth in oil of rosins, or in one pot of aquilone.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come, so apply an emplaster by default, with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white; then put on gentle steam, and do not bind the night; and if the break in the night is small, and it is broken into small pieces, so stretch to suitable instruments for this, then sew the tear, and cure things in a natural way, binding and healing, as emplasters and ointments are suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the night, so treat the tent, and put weights of cloth on it, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken below, and there is no wound outside, and the break is just so, and is not split in two, only that it is known slightly inside, one recognizes it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jawbone, that you put your two index fingers in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left side of the mandible, then put your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the break slightly inside, and bind it with equal force.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is split in two, then it is necessary that you administer an extension of three parts, until it becomes equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put a poultice on the broken jawbone, and put a double drapery on it; and put a great iron plate, well made, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give him light victuals.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape is changing, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put a poultice on it, of mill powder with egg white or barley meal, after you have removed the previous poultice; and put a light woolen cloth on top, and if the poultices harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until he is healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess forms, then apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, take care that no part of the bone is left; if subtlety to extract with suitable instruments for that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then sew the wound if it is large, and put suitable poultices on top to bring forth flesh, until he is healed.
de la forcele	of the fracture
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture is broken multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the break is such that it is divided into three manners: or it is broken and split in two, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such when the break has no wound that you have two assistants, so one holds the assistant's tool that feels the fractured forcele; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your need; and strain and lift the forcele, and hold the spear in your hand, so that you put the break in its proper position.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele forward because it comes from behind, then it is necessary that the patient lies sovining on his hatedil, and puts a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder; and instructs the assistants to bring down the shoulder, until the bone of the forcele is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then bring the break to your hands, and if you find it disjointed, then it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then file it with one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the forcele to protect the sac.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems like a spoon, and is not shaved, and be as wide as it should be, according to the greatness of the bone and the power of the work; and have two joints, just as you see, and one large and the other narrow, just as the rifting of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, so count the wound, and if the rifting is small, or you doubt of a hot abscess, then apply the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, then soak a cloth in oil of rosins, and vinegar, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without trimming, is that you put on the bone a plaster made from mill powder and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a small spear under the armpit if needed; then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put a double cloth over the bandages and the plaster; then take a thin strip three inches long and wrap it around that bandage so that the chief of the bandage are hanging; and place the strip on the breakage, and turn the bandage around the neck and under the armpit healthy and unhealthy; and gently remove each part, and when you see that the binding is holding the breakage properly, and you clearly see that the strip is not moving over the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit so that he can lift the aid in high; thus ease the breakage of the shoulder by aligning the shoulder joint, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie unless bad accidents come, for up to 20 days; then reapply the plaster if you see that it is needed, and strain and leave it so, until he is restored; and he is restored in at most 28 days, and less than that with some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Poc avient que li espaule brise or large leu ne em mileu, and ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l'apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, and la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, in toutes les manieres that tu peux; puis met sur le leu poudre dou molin with abun d'uef, and estoupes legieres, and met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus una estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l'espaule, and se desoz l'estele est chevemens in any leu of l'espaule, si emple celle cheveure d'estoupes de lin, si that li estele siece igalment; and puis l'estraint a tout una grant bende fermement, si that li estele ne se mueve de son leu, and regarde le liien chescun jor; and toutes les fois k'il amolist, si l'estraint, and met igal l'estele s'elle est fuer de son leu, and gise li malaides sus son costeit; and li espaule est restouree in XX jours or en xxv. Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, and soies seur, car ce n'est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes before and points under the skin, then fill it with, and remove the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the humerus to calm down an inflamed abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the rib
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is sometimes broken in middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in middle, then it sinks below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks sustenance, and altogether, and by chance bleeds blood, and opens up the sinews in the broken bone, and feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient sits up on his back, and puts 1 cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and makes it even in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put emplaustres and bandages above the subtle bandage of salt, or another light one, and wraps it in 1 cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the binding back around to the back, and bind it gently, and reward each hour by loosening, and if it swells again, bind it again; and if it is necessary to unbind due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the joint, or pain or abscess, then hasten and unbind, and remove the emplaustre, and address what has come forth in ways of cures; then reset the emplaustre, and bind it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs does not come forth except in thick places after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend forth except because they are slippery; and one senses it well by probing the back.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedy is that you put it equal to the break, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the poultice, and bind with a bandage, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and piercing, as if from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the skin; and breathes with difficulty, and all, and vomits a great amount of blood, and this is grievous sickness, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push the breakage away from the inside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless an inflamed abscess has come before it.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that one should put poultices on the joint to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the poultice might attract unnecessary substances to the joint due to the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the breath around, then take care of the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which points to the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put something underneath the instrument to prevent the synovial fluid; and then one must saw the bone, and draw it lightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes forth, then place on it moist cloths soaked in rose oil and place on the area; and treat meanwhile the area where it belongs to the abscess, and be cautious about the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Rarely does the breakage come to the bone of the neck, and it does not often bend forth; and similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that there are many mortal dispositions, and if they numb and feel well when one stretches and pricks them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient is cured, if one applies treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the back of the spine, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if there are swellings in the hands, and on the back there is ventosity and evacuation without will; and when one has treated it above the belly button, there is evacuation without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is bent over his back and wants to settle, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: if one does not labor at all in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is more easy.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you reward him if there is an inflamed abscess, by putting rose oil or egg yolk oil on top of the spine, until he is calmed; then put a soothing and drying emplaustre on it, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Et if some bone is severed, so cover on the wound; and take away the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with a suture, then anoint with ointment, extracting flesh, until it is healed; and if the skull of the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow", so put your pouch in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the poultice and plaster on, if you need it; then strain it, and if there is a severed bone, do that, and take away the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there follows a little diminution at the head; and do long and decline by degrees, and comes to the patient in pain at the spot, and punctures, and swells up what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, so set equal to that breakage, until it is in natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is of the length, or it declines inwardly, so make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that breakage appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, so put on the poultice, then put on a plaster of wood or horn, and hold the breakage still, so that it does not move; and apply the place below the ribs, until the sides are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed down, and put on what we have said before; then come back to the restoration, and hold it still as is necessary, if there is no bad accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take one piece of plain wood, about the size of this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with two strings, and bend them up high, and make the patient sit on one chair; then throw their broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the desired position, and has about half a covering of wood, then bend it over some heavy thing or let the attendants stretch it down below; then put the mallet on the breakage equal to your hands together, until the breakage returns as is necessary.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that you make the patient sit on their haunches, and tie their hand to their neck; then instruct two attendants to have one hold what is above the breakage in their hands, and the other hold below all one string, and stretch each one to his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold the ligament under the skinfold, and above the skinfold, and stretch each of the attendants to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the skinfold is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put the ligament halfway under the armpit, and the other one towards the hollow, under the skinfold; and also if the skinfold is towards the hollow, it is necessary to put the ligament lightly, without labor, until the skinfold is even above and below, then set the skinfold as it should be, and strain it, lest abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms there, do not hold it at all for seven days, and put on a moist poultice in a warm place and with rose oil, until the abscess is calmed down; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you put the poultice on the breakage, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the bandage, and hold it on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in a steady state, unless something hinders it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use plasters, and put on the breakage a larger and stronger plaster than the others, with about two inches of space between each one, and so that each plaster is as large as it passes over the breakage three inches from each side; then hold on to the plasters, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, stronger and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of stars, and the constriction, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then let it remain tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days to the bandage, lest inflammation or swelling come to the place, or the numbness cannot reach the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If one approaches, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the aid four cushions of equal wool, and look every hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or become loosened the bonds; if the accident is due to the power of medicine, and give him food as we have previously prescribed, in such a way that the food is for the most subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be noticeable.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be set in forty days from all; and then one must release and administer baths and medicaments of ointments to direct the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is foul and stuck, then it should be released in one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and that is the one that supports the pouch; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little finger. By chance, break only the large foscile alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restorations are light, and the healing is easy; and when the great ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bones that are broken alone, then it must be slightly extended and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great bones, then it must be stretched more strongly; and extend it on one cushion, and keep the small of the back higher than the other, and the little fingers lower than the others, so that the patient is crossed over himself, with the cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the attendants' arm to the part below his hand, or to the joint, and another attendant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the mirror equal to his better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has fragments, then place each one in its place, and if there is any fragment that holds the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then proceed with force and osteum, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound with the break, I have spoken of it in a single chapter; then take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there arise abscesses, then take a mixture made of rose oil and white wax that is not too hard or too soft; and apply the mixture subtly on top until the abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and put an embalming powder made of mill powder with a lot of egg white, after which put in stars, and let the star be more forceful on the edge, slightly larger than the others; and know that there should be six stars or arms in various dispositions: whether the briseure is on one bone, or two; and hold it tighter above the briseure than elsewhere, and always less far away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the drapes that are above the briseure be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the threads, with which it is strained, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water, until those itchings are calmed; and let the member not at all rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the ligament is damaged and the bones are separated, or something similar, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little bit, and let it be thus for some days, until the swelling comes, and then strain.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not separate them for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or, around, then bind his hands to his neck, and make his necks even, and beware of movement and getting up, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	(None)
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and among the fingers, there are many breakages, and but few abscesses come.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the attendants' fingers, and set them even with the mire, until they are well joined; and put a plaster and poultices, if abscesses do not come, then put a stitch according to the quality of the linen; and be wrapped in one poultice of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is around the knuckle of the finger, then make a sphere of drapes, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken finger; and then strain with a long drape, and let the stitch be as soft as the flesh of the hand, and strain, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the end, then it is necessary that you put a stitch on top, and another one below in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind everything around the hand, and stop the strap between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our fingers, except for the thumb, then set it even, as is necessary; and bind with the finger, and see if you put a straight small stitch to lift the break, and does not move; and if the break is in other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, then set it even, and bind with the healthy finger that comes after; or you bind them all together, just holding what's worth it, or you put a stitch on top, like on the thumb; and take care in the restoration and disposition of abscesses hot, and address what comes, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	(None)
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the ankle is often broken, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that you tie one strap above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches his strap to his part evenly; and that is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the tailbone, then one of the ligaments points towards the fingernail, and the other ligaments are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then one ligament is under the knee and the other extends downward; then place the mirrors equal to his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and tie it, lest abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, then let it be calmed and then return to your work and your care; the binding is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the break with a double-layered bandage of three or four layers, and remove any superfluous parts; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and insert a long thread between the tailbone and the leg, under the knee from below, and let the end of the thread come out on top; then wrap the bandage around the leg and tailbone, then place three or four stays on the break; then start binding firmly; as you go up the break, loosen the bind; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you have inserted between the leg and tailbone, and tie three stays above, then return to the bottom at the end of the thread, until it comes out under the foot; and if it does not move from its place, then leave it so, and let there be no abscess or swelling or similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is, then dislodge it and set straight what comes forth, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, then one must split it open, if possible; and if not, then one must cut through the ligament, and pull forward; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And any time the case is broken, one puts in splints, as in an arm or leg; nonetheless, in this restoration made it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the case is restored in one day, or perhaps less or more, according to the diversity of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Knows that in the hollow of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's only a split or a hole, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and that seems quite well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one sets equal those things which are torn to their joints, as long as it can be assembled; then put an ointment, and put in a rounded splint, if you need it, and strain it as it should be, then reward all the dispositions we have said for other breaks, just like aposteme heat and similar things; and put what is needed to each accident, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Knows that in the leg there are two bones, for which one is called by right "malleoli", and the other is called "fibula"; and it happens to all breaking like it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is complete. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and is easily seen; and turns below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer an extension, and set it evenly, and bind the splints equally; but always, if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, let the extension be smaller and lighter; and stretch according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of split wood that correspond to the length of the leg from one end to the other, and wrap them around the leg with bandages on top and bottom, and tie it in the middle as well; and so the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and some people wrap a wooden splint along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly does what is needed for the break or wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is aposteme heat or another accident; and cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and the toes are a little bent, and it's nothing more than some slight movement.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot break and you see those bones overlapping each other, then set the patient's foot on the ground, as if it were going to walk; and then put your own foot on top of his, at the place where the bones are lifted up; then press down so they return to their places; then apply an ointment and cover with a cloth on top, and put underneath the belly of the foot a small tablet with two full cheeks; then tighten it to the foot accordingly; and when you have wrapped bandages around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some broken toes, then restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place underneath the foot that tablet which I mentioned, and strain it accordingly; and if there are three or four or more broken toes, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strain the tablet underneath the foot; and let it be so that the ventral part of the foot is held firmly.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it's necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the thumb bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of man is broken, or of woman, restore it thus as we have said in the bones of the hare; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use there, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies more than one disposition to the right way of restoration; then understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and pour it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaks with wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, and the wounds that we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then keep it moist with vinegar, if you have nothing else; then begin again to restore the break in that same hour or day, lest apostemes come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess forms there, then let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so that the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing above the skin's surface, then it is necessary that you set it slightly to your hands, at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suited to set equal with your hands, then reamend this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each breaking treatment; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend much under compression on the limb at your work, and be sharp before, and thick from halfway forward thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palinche", therefore it is necessary that the curved key be placed on top of the apparent bone; and bind it once, until it regains its shape, and let them be equal to one another.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the top of the bone, until the instruments have possession.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, to your ability; then ream out what remains in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So it is in its place, then wet the linen cloth with black stiptic wine, and properly cover it; and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else that has oil, lest you cause infection and corruption; then administer the poultice when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil consequences may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to put on poultices; but wrap around, in place of poultices, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see the boil after one or two days to enlarge on the wound, then remove everything you put on top with all vinegar and put healing unguent for wounds, such as four-herb ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it is bound up and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow-like shape runs down slowly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but instead returns to being bowed, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason it is necessary that you cleanse the wound with a tent, and remove all these devitalized pieces that bring about that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in its chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens on the member, such as the hip or shoulder bone, and other similar great bones, do not pull it at all, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it has healed; perhaps it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see this after the healing of a break, especially when it is near the jointure, and it is a sad thing to behold the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if we are fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, acaica, and similar others, in such a way that you take some of these things or all together, and mix them with black wine or with abundant urine or with oil; and put it on the boil at night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and begin another one, until the swelling is gone; or you can bind it with a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of cloth are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then cut it away, and make the superfluity apparent; or have it done by any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it remains unhealed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone break is restored and the limb remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not allow the nourishment to reach the limb; or because of excessive swelling; or because of great movements, but not at its proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and give their body nourishment until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths to them, and give them joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling often subsides with warm water, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those foolish people who say that one must break the limb all over again; many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death itself; however, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary to rise them with warm water, or cook soft herbs such as vervain leaves, roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, such as one made with dyaquilon well done, and take the mucilage of vervain and mix it with goose fat or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or take figs that are fatty, and grind them with flax seed, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the lump is removed by constant and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be gentle movement to each member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is inflamed and hardened like stone, and it needs to be cut with iron, then it must be covered just to the bone, slightly incising finely; and put sense and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	There is no sentence to translate in this case, as "Ci encomence li livres des dislocations" appears to be the title or heading of a section within the text, rather than a sentence to be translated.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then one must immediately restore it.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the swelling grows, and by chance if it is reset with pain at the swelling; therefore it is not good to move it until it has subsided: many times bring shame and other pains; nonetheless, when this happens, make the patient sicker, then leave him, until the abscesses are appeased; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then reposition it gently, and care for each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly removed from their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in a few positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you should reposition it quickly, without delaying; and in such a way that the attendants hold the patient's head, and pour the mirror's sap from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands are free to make equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jawbones and move them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror places it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to return, even if they are the two jawbones together, then raise them with warm water and oil, until you gently reset them; nor delay in returning, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well with a sense of softening, then place damp cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind lightly with moist bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his legs be positioned between two cushions, so that he does not move to either side, nor does he make an effort to speak, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb; and then eat what he wants lightly, and does not worry about opening his mouth to eat or drink, as long as the jaw is well numb and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their position, then fever and usual habit come to pass, and by chance, solution of the belly, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and often the person who has it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the front into its continuity and towards the chest, and is dislocated at times to the back, and it is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, stretches out his arms; and then presses the joint firmly with his palm, and it will return; then apply the poultice and bandage, and tighten; and the leg which is towards the cut cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does happen to dislocate at any time, then reset it back to its place, just as we said; then apply the poultice and bandage, and tighten, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus the same procedure is followed for bringing back the leg from the shoulder, when it becomes separated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways: the one that dislocates at the base of the shoulder blade below; and the second that dislocates at the part of the spine; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwardly for the arm pits.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that there is a blow or crushing, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it has dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you inspect it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the shoulder blade, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them manifest diversity; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the shoulder blade, touching the top of the shoulder, just as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move with any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not to be restored except when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the attendants lift the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers below the armpit, and lift the jointure with force to its place; and the attendants lift the hand, and stretch it out high, then put it back down; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within four days after, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the assistant should gently soften and soothe, as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilotus in water is made, and brought forth. Then the patient should be placed on their back, and an equal wool pad should be placed underneath the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror at the heel of the patient, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and draw out the patient's hand; and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downward. The shoulder now returns immediately, and if you see that you should do this: and it is that you make someone present who is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the costard, and push the patient's shoulder underneath the shoulder blade of the patient, and lift the shoulder up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another assistant should draw out the patient's hand downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can lift with him something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one also remedies it in another way: thus take a long iron rod and place it on the ground, so that the head is as tall as a pistol, neither too big nor too small; then have him placed under the patient, but with the cloth wrapped soft above, and the patient's hand will be stretched down below in this form, and the jointure will return to its place quickly.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it on top of the wooden beam with a soft cloth, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it under the pillow of the patient; and stretch your arm over the long rod, and tie the assistant on top of the rod, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one shoulder of an easel wide, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you place under the pillow a sphere of equal wool, then put the poultice wrapped with powder from the mill, with incense and an egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then strain the poultice under the pillow comfortably, and turn the cloth over the poultice, and enfold the hand in its own neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he rest a little, until the members are comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then let him rest again after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and has not been softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply cauterizations to three pores, as shown before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after seven days he still does not hold, and the joint will not lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is near the chest or breast or behind, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and another method is administered; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes swelling in the member and tardiness of movement, then have the patient take many baths until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is displaced at points, and returns at points; and if it is displaced from all sides, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not corrected, for one can see it well and feel it well; and displace according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person with good health, so you can see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joints are stiff and cannot bend the arm, nor touch their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscesses do not come to life again, for if the abscesses were to form again, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset from all sides, especially when it is behind; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance it brings death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such when it can be reset that you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and push the joint to its crevices together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes the shoulder which is displaced from its place at the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and thus two ministers extend the arm, and hold it steady two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on both sides, having wrapped a cloth double long and wide; and when the doctor has joined the jointure to her hand, oil it with some oil to soften the jointure, then bind the jointure firmly, until it returns; and when it is back in place, put on plaster powder mixed with egg, and strain it firmly, and leave the arm at the neck of the patient for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the poultice and the bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels grief after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and stroke him well, and press until he is soothed; or you put some sheep's fat on the jointure, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, stroke the jointure temperately, then put the fat back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times until he is healed; and if you see, then put some vetch seed, moist and warmed with butter, and strain it on him; so he will return to his disposition.
li dislocation de la main	Hand dislocation
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The jointure of the hand dislocated, and the return is light, more than the other joints Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place promptly, in the same time that it is dislocated, so long as the swelling remains or an abscess forms hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is that you put the patient's hand on a table, and stretch out his fingers, and let the doctor place it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the jointure, and hold it until it recovers. However, it is necessary for you to look if it is well in its place; then put the patient's hand back on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the physician puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If she returns now, it's well If not, then he should strain soothing poultices on abscesses and let him be thus without reoccurring.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he can't endure it, and you can't put it in its place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and it's not necessary for the patient to do anything else as long as his hand is numb, and he can't strain any part at all: thus know that the nerves are strained, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy than to strain by applying fire cauterization around the case, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the ointment that we have said, then strain and leave it five days, then release and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then soak the water hot, and rub it until he is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the two tendons of the hand are dislocated to each part, sometimes on the back of the palm or belly; then they are bent, and push the dislocation towards your pouches as long as it revives, then hold the head of the tendon and bend it towards the part where it is disconnected; and leave it for two days, and then put it in its place that day; and bind it with a bandage, just as we have said, and loosen it from one day to another, and make it move, and rebind the nut; and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the hip of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the hip of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	Et li signes si est that the evacuations spring forth without will, nor can they be held, and many times a certain member is softened, or two arms or both legs; and many times the shin bone changes into four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you reward if gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no care nor recovery throughout.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or percussions or similar things, the ancient methods of cures say with great words, where there is not much benefit in all; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositis that comes to the front of the chest, there is no intelligence nor health; and also that which comes directly in both sides, and one can only cure the fire that comes properly to the back, as I said; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal position, and have a strain under him, so he does not get hurt; then place two tissons in the ground, one at the head and the other at the feet, and tie one string between the straps of the patient's legs, and another between the hips, and thighs, and ankles; and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two tissons; and be well closed, the tissons as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a board three arms long, and hollow out the bottom part of it, and have the patient sit on the side, and put the head of the board under the part that shows, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and place the mirrors at the feet on the other end of the board, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, do so also to the one who turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And do so that you place two tongs at the head of the patient one arm long, and two others towards the feet, with a palm's width between each tong, above and below; and have one pertus in each tong where the turning takes place, and let the tongs be firmly on the ground so they don't move; and between each pair of tongs, put one turning tong, whereupon the tendons turn, and have two small tongs one palm long to turn the turning; then tie the cord that is among the straps at the head towards the head, and the other cord at the feet towards the other tongue, and each servant turns their tongue to all the cord, and the master makes the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equal, he puts on desiccating plaster with an abundance of egg whites, and then binds, and then takes a small iron tool, three digits long, to reposition the seat of the gilbositis and the part of the spine, then binds with a bandage, as we have said, and uses gentle nursing care until the patient is healed; and if nothing comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the tool we mentioned before; and sometimes one should administer a piece of pumice stone, and sometimes there appears in the rear part of the spine on the back, and think that it is dislocation; but it is the bone that opens up, so one should not have presumption: for it may bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come to dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiii. parts: inward and outward, and before and behind; and more inward than outward, and less dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of its dislocation is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more in the patient's knee than in the healthy one, and the ailing patient cannot double their knee over the fire; and the swelling is located near the inflamed aposteme, because the head of the hip comes away.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens outward is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens before is that he is well in his leg according to fulfillment; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the hip is at the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this likeness of dislocation are that you restore whether the dislocation is old and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no care; and it is not necessary that he have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three kinds of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it will come back, and there is no need for another care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort à II mains, ou à I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main dessus en tel manièr qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrene d’un souef lién sur la cuixe; et uns autres tienne le chief du lié; et estendent amont et aval tout à une fois, tant que le malaide soit levé de terre à une fois, et demeure pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to put a cure on its likeness. When the dislocation is in the middle, it is necessary that you support the patient on their side, then place the strap on the root of the hollow, and the lever that is below the angle, then stretch the strap up towards the angle, and towards the forefoot; then take another minister's arms, and embrace the thick part of the hollow patient, and stretch it far away: thus it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the patient together with a soft cord on the two heels and calves, and the sick leg be stretched two digits longer than the others; then let it be hung from the head of a tree, and let it be above the earth two arms long; then instruct the servant to wrap the chief of the crotch, and let another servant stand with the patient, tightly wrapping the crotch, for the joints are now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the rear, then the patient lies down as we have said in those who have gilbositeit, and stretch the cord properly on the sick leg, and also on the hip; then put two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick the torch between the crotch of the patient inside the shape; and have planted moist cloths all around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then each servant spreads out towards him, and the surgeon puts an equal amount of dislocation to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put her on the bed, and press thus as we have said in the gilbosity, and place the patient on the natural side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the physician's hand on the angry diseased hip, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it's not good to stretch the patient down or lift her up on the earth, but rather have her as if her hip were dislocated in front, as we have said about lying on two hips; and be on her face, and extend the strap so as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and it will be just right when the patient stretches out their legs and they are even; then adjust the groins, and put the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and if you see that they are even, then strain as before, and let her rest for three or four days; then release it, and make her walk nicely, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, and if she does not bend to her cuixe, know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and one other minister stretches out his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has bent his leg to his cuixe slightly; and apply the poultice on top, and make the leg lie with the cuixe, and keep them together for three or four days, then unbind him; and do not trouble the patient with walking until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, so administer extension force, as we have said in the treatment of the hump, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated and in the back and forward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tend towards the part where it is dislocated: the return to its place is easy, and one should stretch it gently with their hands when it is only slightly displaced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely displaced, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold the ministers apart from the leg, above the ankle; then take the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently push the foot up; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and stretching the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then restart the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small pillow firmly in the earth between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so as not to harm the patient; then hold the ministers at the thigh, and another minister stretches the foot with his hands or a strap, which is tied above the ankle of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the pillows should be placed between the patient's thighs to keep him when you are stretching him; then place the fingers equally on the dislocation in your hand, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the displacement will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	Et quant elle iert a point, so met the poultice and bandages on top, and the strain is formed, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the veins that are above the ankle behind, lest the ligament be too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligament swells, loosen the strain; then release it at the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for four days; and if he walks before that term, it is not sure that he will not still become dislocated.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise from this, then it is necessary to treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	knees
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the knees are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them gently without effort, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the heel or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on .i. table directly straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints; then press firmly with your foot until it recovers; and when it is even, and there appears nothing, then place a board under the sole of the foot two feet long, then strain firmly, and leave it three days, then release; and make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.
Amen	Painful
