O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is strange from top to bottom, the science is perverted and decaying, and nothing remains of the fathers except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will vivify it altogether with the ordination of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behooves him who takes it upon himself to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving veins and of resting, and from there issues.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, beware lest he fall into error and harm men; thus I have seen many times more of those who take upon themselves this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I see a foolish doctor who treated an abscess on the neck or throat of a woman, and treated the arteries of the neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of an old man, and the stone was large; so he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the old man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they had left it in, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in hand the care of the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors, out of ignorance, held the break against the wound by strong ligature, and did not leave the wound to heal, and they left it thus, and ordered that he should not move it; and thus it remained until the leg became entirely swollen and putrid, and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to dislocate the leg; and when I saw it dislocated, it was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire member was almost lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another mirror that burst into an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely cut out what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: it is to know where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people may not speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in crosswise, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the grievous maladies of bitter sickness; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish people."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to twelve chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the ironware of cauterization, and all that which is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and has the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and has the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and the harm are the longest words and subtle science and secret responses; and from this spoke the wisest men, and agreed to this; and I suffer few of their words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cauterizes universally for every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry complexions together with matter, some thought that fire cauterizes is great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cauterization is not useful for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured by hot disease through heat, nor by drying; and he who says the opposite, that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in no way should one interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of ten years; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than medicine burning with ardor.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come otherwise than to the member which is cooked, and does not harm another member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Here is the translation:
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I reveal the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree at the time when the cauterizations are to be done, and they select promptly.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries that occur are immediately cured by the aid of cauterization; and likewise, since cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasty ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think anything, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for a disease that is healthy through cautery has no return; and he says so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes again according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, as fire cautery for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return again; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that cauteries of gold instruments are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say it was because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not cause putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they told us.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat up an instrument of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is quickly cooled down; and if one heats it too much; they make it into fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because of this, we do not use cauteries of iron that we have made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter of the eyes just below, because it was easier to find for those who are seeking.
dou cautere olivaire	for the olive fire cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and meanwhile against all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solvent modifying the head, three or four times, according to whether the strength and age and the habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make a remedy for the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then burn the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign on the level of the ink, and make a slight impression and stretching with your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gently, and re-examine the level if you see the opening of the bone; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put in soft and thick cotton inside, and place on the level, and let it stay three days; afterwards put on a moist cloth in a wrapping; and leave on until the scab falls off; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said that the more one delays opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason, it hinders healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should not leave the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said that one should leave the cautery so much on top, and press so hard that one takes out as much of the bone as a vertoil that women put in their fusez because the humors issue forth badly; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is made foolish by continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salutary and mild for me, and thus I have observed in some assemblies a healthy salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the whole head aches chronically and lasts for a long time, one should use the remedies of yreis and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of applying poultices; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that which was cautioned about above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make the cautery in the place which is called "vasselz"; and it is placed where one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those on which one makes the cautery of the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but nothing profits: then you make cauteries according to eight methods, that is to know medical ague and fiery.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medical ague are that you take a dose of oil, and remove the scab and the crust; then make the temple where the pain holds in some manner so you can replace the dose of oil under the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then remove it and treat with a dose of oil, and leave the wound thus for eight or nine days; then put on a poultice made from honey in a cloth so that it can absorb into the skin.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of anointing, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that it makes use of certain burning medicines that I have written or treated in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is thus according to this manner. Heat the cautery of where it is in the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and appears small; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the thickness of the skin be cauterized; and lift your hand so that the artery does not get burned, which is deformed, and decorates abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it on the spot for two days; then put moist cotton in a poultice, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauteries mentioned before in medicine and the iron does not suit them, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and mark a line half a finger long on the aching eye, and remove your hand once, and hold still so you do not touch the artery and do not reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one yawns, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disorder of blood in the artery when it is touched, which causes great fear and dismay to the one who does not know it, and who is not a student and has not experienced it; but I will tell you how to restore blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. Coutelz; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain in the ears caused by cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold, and one has tried medicines solutives and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cautery all around the ailing ear, or around the eyes if the pain holds in both, and slightly incline below the root of the ear then you have signed the place of the bite; and apply ten points around each ear; after healing the place so it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment that must be cured by cautery is not outside of those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cautery to similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves with fluxes and evacuations of the head and gagging, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third in the setting of the lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part, and make the cautery above the head of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery so long as the moisture of the blood is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the cupping that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cup should be a little larger; after curing the place as I said before, so long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the horns of the head, and one in the head, and one at the place which is called "vasselz" as we have mentioned before, and put the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of sluggishness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large and round mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, take the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput a plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus sane; it is good; and if he is not, do three cauteries on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cautery of two fingers width; and cure as the others, and if you see them join, and the patient is suffering, do a cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, do others on the horns, and cure until he is sane; and let the cauteries be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purged of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, raise the head of the patient, then apply fire cautery to the head and on each horn, and behind and in front of the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is fierce, apply three fire cauteries to the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is felt, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure until it is healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purge the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is greatly suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, apply gargarism and mastication purging the brain frequently with good meat; afterwards, raise the head in the middle, and apply fire cautery as we have said before, and fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is fierce and suffering, apply fire cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and may the olivier fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is infantile, make them a subtle fire cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause is melancholy from superfluous or corrupt and gross humors, then one should apply fire cautery in such a way as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the superfluous humors declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will purify their brain, according to what was said earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, take the patient's head; afterwards make a well-made torteil of linen, like a circle, and place it on their head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly on all sides; afterwards apply the liniment, and anoint with old berry balm; and heat it with tempered fire, so that they do not suffer from the poultice; afterwards remove the circle from inside their head, and let it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with another good regimen, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you see that the fire cautery is done, making more points throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then put cotton wool in a burrow and in grease of geese.
de l’awe des eulz	of the pride of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pride comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give a drink to the patient, cleansing the head, and warding off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding to rear the head, and making a fire cautery in the head, and making two cauteries on the temples if the pride of the eyes is assembled there, or if it descends into one eye; and cover all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the decorrement of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stain with a little powder as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision with caution how you will proceed; and no time is it done by cautery or burning beneath the two eyes at the back of the head.
dou cors des larmes	of the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear as flaws in the head; and one sees that they are superfluous, cold, and phlegmatic, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the treatment descending from the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burning beneath the .ij. bones; and if it needs more, if you cauterize strongly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three hot medicines; after that raise the head, and apply fire cautery or mild olive oil cautery; and apply three fire cauteries of the cautery called "clavulis" on the three ulcers, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavulis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive". For it is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it makes three cauteries on the three ulcers as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are turned into pustules, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as much like the foil of a mirror, and be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk oil from a pearl on the eye, then heat the cautery in the form of:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cautery on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the vein are that you see the skin retreated, and the hairs lifted to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a bundle so that the scaling is removed; after the treatment of ointment so that it be healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs grow afterwards, and the skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same place, as you did previously; and if the hairs are sparse, cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizers of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and living coals, one .З. each, and mix well; and do it hastily, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and apply to the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, one must operate on one, and if in both alike; and put under the eye a soft, wet cotton pad; and let the head of the patient be in good health and show your finger, applying the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for they feel burning as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the burning sensation has passed, lift up the skin of the eye, and look to see if the skin is lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraining force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then apply the medicine again on the spot where the medicine did not take hold, until your operations are even, and your eyes are in balance; then put on a soft, wet cotton pad in a wrapping, as long as the bitter roots are extracted, after curing the eye of the ailment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if it is necessary that you take great care of your work through great caution so that no point of the medicine fails in your eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, start the medicine again on the one who is softened by the proper paper, just as you have done beforehand; after the treatment until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of dou mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly; and do not miss the right path for one who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Here is the translation:
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is uncovered, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, then operate, and extract further the bone; after placing the hot cautery in the form of a burn, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail following the eye, so your hands do not play tricks; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, then recommence the cautery once again, and another time if you have mastery of it, and let it stay two days; after I place on cotton wool in a blister, and cure the ointment of the desiccation until it is healthy, and if ten days pass and it is not healthy, then place on corrosive medicine as long as the bone is uncovered; and reapply according to what comes into its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients spoke of. Then take the fistula, and split it open; after place in the opening a subtle camel-hair brush, because this is its form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make a quantity of a pound; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the flowing pus does not run to its eye; and it is fitting to place on the eye a patient cotton wool in a bath of egg whites or in water: the pound if it is the levelling of the fistula, and it is healthy through marvelous sanity.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have spoken of, it's good. If not, then one must administer pertus to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is suitable for its own location.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat it. i. a small cautery tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply the fire cautery to those cracked places until it reaches just to the fontanel; afterwards heal the cerebral cortex until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gullet
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the gullet or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putrid matter and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit: then it is necessary to have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron rod reaches the fontanel, and where the rear of the limb; and do thus one time or two, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery that will come hereafter in such a way that you place a cane over the tooth; and put the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and keep it there for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments with medicines do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cautery of blistering and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Here is the translation:
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Here is the translation:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make fire cautery according to what you wish for the head, and according to what you have the power; and it is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	of the scabs
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scabs are of a flow and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn the cautery that comes after this form, and have two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as the master is, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a cotton cloth moistened in borax so that the discharge is removed; after healing the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures overcome the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by medicines that dissolve; after make fire cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn with fierce heat but rather a little. After make another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and heal the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the chest are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the ribcage in their place; and another cautery between the breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called "poins" because the form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just up to ..., or thereabouts. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three joints according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are more gentle, you make three of them together in one application.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, soothe the patient on their back and on their side; after lift the heart which is within the inflamed area with two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, apply the cautery which has .ij. ners douqueil, that is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and there will come the figure of the cautery with .iiij. cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery that has .iij. ners, because the figure of cauterization is six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tenth, and it is the form of the cautery that has .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often it is applied to this same nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the fire cauterization with a rod; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens soon, then cauterize on the thick part of the cauterization, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the full cauterization of the lung
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Here is the translation:
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And certain ancients said that a man using fire cautery similarly to a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and soon the pain ceased, as we have stated in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is no fear where the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the spleen
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they add three manners of fire cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of these manners is that you make three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand at all on the cautery, and let the patient be aware of it on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery iron which has .ij. nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is in the right place, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left, and be the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery iron be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, burn the .ij. nerves so much that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then draw back the cautery iron, and thus there will be .iiij.. And if you see, if you cauterize the whole cautery at .iij. nerves. After the cure when it has been obtained by long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not suitable for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure according to the methods we have stated in divisions, and your cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries around the belly, and .i. above the stomach, and one above the liver, and .i. above the spleen, and .ij. behind the back above the spine, and .i. near the thigh; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery open for a long time, do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like a key that we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is presented here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of bitter citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too deeply, lest you stir up the bitter citrine, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on the legs, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauteries be of the length, one beneath the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauteries there for a long time without curing, that the ailment may issue; after curing the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the massage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When a stomach problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vertigo, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel with one subtle cautery claw, and two cauteries on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the puncture, and one cautery on each island, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or many, and are old and of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you do cauteries: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is entirely deflected downwards a little and a little in triangles, and .i. cautery below the navel. ij. two.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflate, then one makes .i. a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the spleen with all the clave cauteries; and leave the cautery open long enough. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with thelul, heat the cautery that seems .i. red-hot, and then place it all wrapped on that coped thelul; and leave until your hand feels the cauteries coming to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows freely; do this one time or .ij., and if there is much of thelul, cauterialize each one as we have said; after curing the useful limbs so that they are healthy; and if you cautelize with a great cautery on the Achilles', it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly healed
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer the touch of a scalpel, that we will recount in its place, if such illness comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes, and is enveloped and produces putrid and corrupt matter, then you must probe with a subtle instrument, and take care to know how deep the instrument has entered. Afterwards, heat the cautery which seems suitable, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the instrument has entered, and repeat the cautery until the corrupted and putrid matter is burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to the quantity of one's need; and beware of the nerves that are involved, and of the large veins. If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, then beware of these places, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think it is not a permanent cure; afterwards, cure the place until it is healthy, and if the place is healed, and the matter is eliminated slowly, then know that the place is entirely healthy; and if the matter is not eliminated, know that the place is troubled, and corrupts the bone at the bottom; and thus as one of those things that we will recount in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes with shivers, and great windiness, and does not take such a hold on a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the shins on one side and the other to the clavear cautery which we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cautery, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is troubled and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply cautery to the affected area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as our finger; and make a cautery above the back, or three if you need it; and the clavear cautery should be according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, if they feel great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said about fire cautery, and three cauteries below the back; and let the cauteries be clavicular, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so it is necessary to cautery the patient on the thigh bone with one cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint around the thigh as it turns, so that the thigh is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of the large olives, and let the cauteries be as deeply perforated as all the veins; and heal until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the region of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is not working, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary to purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After doing cautery; and the manner of doing cautery is in several ways: it is to know that there are assembled medicines burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you apply three triangular cauteries on the region of the hip in this form, and make a good profundity and greatness, and leave between each cautery the width of a finger, and so they are olive-shaped; sometimes one does cautery in the middle above the head of the hip, because there are three according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, you should apply the cautery to the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire hip, and all the spaces of the circle are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And that's the method of treating sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and doesn't reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and leg, then make two fire cauteries there where the patient says the pain is, and one fire cautery above the ankle three fingers wide, on the left side a little; and let the fire cautery be gentle, and let the burning of the skin be slight; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or near the ankle, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the fire cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is more, then make them more; and if it seems that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a fire cautery at the circular or gentle fire cautery, and take good care in all your fire cauteries not to leave so much of the fire cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who made fire cautery above the ankle of two toes, and left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and was pierced and corrupted to all the foot. After a vomiting solution they had death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two adjacent parts, do cautery on one and the other, in this manner. And the wise men say that for the cautery of the ankle, since it is in this way, make a bar of iron as thick as a small nail of a thumb, or slightly less, and place it between the spaces, and let the spaces be of two fingers, and also like our nail, and it has a well-made iron handle; and that's the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is thoroughly red-hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the affected ankle, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery stroke, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is fully healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little for fear of its harshness, and few see those who use it; and nonetheless it is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is beneficial.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar signs of frozen and expanded matter, none of these signs is worth fire cautery, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient is freed from fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five or more fire cauteries according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the fire cautery be done according to the fire cautery which is called "points"; and if you see fit, make two or three fire cauteries at the gentle fire cautery of the shoulder blade, following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted arm when they get up, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize with the fire cautery of that place according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Here is the translation:
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints is caused by moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, if it is cured by cauteries in such a manner: make much of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery at every point that they call "point". And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, which often happens, make a cautery on each knee .iij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you have mastery over more, do more, but do not hold your hand further than necessary, so long as the skin of the body is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend near the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come near the sides or near the ribs, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge the flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	about the treatment of swelling
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When swelling comes from anger, and the bubbles descend to the stomach and it is newly formed, if it happens that when you want to cure, do not disturb that one day; and use things that loosen the belly, so that the threads descend from their belly; afterwards make them sit on their back between your hands, and instruct them to hold their arm as long as the bubble is repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and mark a sign below the swelling on the bone of the thumb, and altogether a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then apply the fire cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and it throws out scents. Then reset the bubbles to their place; and the minister holds his hand so they do not return again; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and a sergeant on the thighs, and another on the foot that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again until you come just to the bone; and beware subtly that the bubble does not burst when you apply the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; afterwards, cure the place of the cautery with butter so that the inflammation is removed; afterwards cure other wounds so that they are healthy, and anoint the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their nourishments be relaxed for a long time, so that the bubbles do not burst when they prepare to go into chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made crutch, and for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and is wary of too great repletion of drink and food, and of too high pride; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will discuss the treatment of surgical wounds in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are conjoined, and you see that they do not grow more, make him .j. cauteries of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third day of the treatment; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at .iij. angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the level of the inch and make a line according to the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized spots with a claw-like instrument. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in no member, or from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torsions and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is next to it, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of messelry
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The messels are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care that the illness is at its beginning, and it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and do not delay or linger, lest the corruption spreads throughout the entire patient; then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, another towards the end of the eyebrows; and three on the corners, and one behind on the temple; and hold your hand so that the cauteries come just to the bone, and until the crude humors can exit through the scabs; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the meselry is scattered all over; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization of these cauteries that we have mentioned above, and one cauterizes in some nose, and two cauterizes on the spine of the neck, and three cauterizes on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest, and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are on the derrière calcifying, so you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and benefits; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the fires. After healing the wound with flour and honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
de enfleure	of swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Here is the translation:
de albaras	of scarifications
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the instruments of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the crust, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of columbine and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix everything together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the body until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer begins to develop, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the cancer; and always this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen again; and more rightly, it is better to cauterize around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot reduce
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it takes time to reduce or due to the abundance of superfluous flesh which they have, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or due to the tension; and you see hastening to reduce: then cauterize around many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten to reduce.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that the cautery is piercing everywhere, heat the cautery of the place where it is formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the purification is alleviated. Afterwards cure until it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a decay of a limb, because it decays the limbs just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery with fire, then heat the iron cauteries very small and great, according to what is needed for the patient or the disease; after cauterying all parts until you have removed all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed. And then let them stay .iii. days, and put on the limbs cauteries suffering from burning with oil until the burns from fire are removed, and all corruption. After the treatment of wounds engendered by cautery.  And if you see after .iii. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this decay has often been cured with medicine in the form of fire cautery; but always fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you have need of it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	for pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a big faulty thing that whelks the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in .ij. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat .i. cautery which is like a pen of steel, and made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail so that it comes to the font of the nail; and let it stay thus .iii. days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of savage mallows boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be disrooted from their roots. Then cure the foot of wounds engendering char so that it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Here is the translation:
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling disease
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shake with cold or nerve damage, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you apply three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cautery; if they stop trembling, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	None appear by default through the bathed body, or pus-filled pustules, that come from gross corrupt matters. If it is necessary at first when they appear, to apply a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made of fir tree resin, which is taken in fire, or of aristologe root, or of a lenticular cautery. And none are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot increase in advance, but are dislodged from the superfluities that come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the cut artery which is wounded in the wound that comes to the outer skin, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold very tight so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue anymore; then apply fire cauteries more or less small and large as they are entirely red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place in which the artery is located, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so tight that the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens to flee when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve which is inside, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three manners that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and held in place afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who administers stanching of the blood strongly with bandages or putting things tightly on, or similar things, does not profit if not done nearly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and he does not have better medicine present, then he must put his finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and strongly stanch until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but let the cold moisture often be very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter that every disease where it is necessary to apply fire cautery or burning medicine, and the tools and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put this chapter among the lowest chief just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it less painful than when one turns.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this it requires more careful caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who are injured by their disease so that they die easily from the fierceness that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and one should have fear of this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give you their sense, and say: "wait, I am ready"; and the disease is despised. It does not matter that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain of, and of which you can take possession; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from head to foot, so that you find more easily what you will need to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is the translation:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen, death hastens them; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work on certain cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so that it could not bear its own weight; and the moisture was so great that it became death, and this moisture is gathered under the bone beneath the brain, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and be as long as two of us, so that the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more increased, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that the parts of the head are swollen on each side, and the water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture away. After holding back the fragments of drapery and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disentangle, and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and let the head relax gradually, and give food to the patient in small amounts of dry meat, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine whether the opening of the abscess is above, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then to the opening of the abscess, and the filling of the water, and let it be according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and remove the flow of blood, so that the patient dies not from the decrease of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to have a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort cure is with fire cautery, by which one will cauterize the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, then, when you cauterize the eyes, that the patient makes a gesture with his head; afterwards rub the area of the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretch out the patient's neck to the entire length of the cloth; then look where the veins are beating, and the eyes of one and the other are after the ears, and are slightly raised; then mark the eyes at the notch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument .ij. times, until the vein is visible to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the entire head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as .ij. two at the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood jumps up high continuously foaming.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign of an inch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six lines, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the siphac, if it happens that apostemes come from nowhere, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the migrating
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old migraine comes, and catarrh is sharp, due to the moisture of the tears and the burning in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by means of medicinal cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterized places, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of his temples grow back, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is slightly reposed for a while in some homes that are too cold; and if it is reposed, then strip off the patient's cloak from certain drapings, then rub the bone with a rough cloth, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of such form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Here is the translation:
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cauter is aid to finish the swellings; because it is of great aid against the swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the old cotton with a lot of cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are removed, if there are dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, so that it be healthy; and if without cutting the artery so much as you will have, if you hasten to cover by cautery, or you fill the old container with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is congealed; and if you don't have this present, put on the old container your finger so the blood is congealed, and raise the old container of cold water until the blood ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cautery the vein of this trenchant cautery, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid staying too long on the sore.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less onto the sore.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the .ij. cuts .i. a space of about a finger's width, and then when you have signed on the .ij. places, and you put the hot iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and cut the vein in .ij. places; and let it be spaced out between the .ij. joints because it is not all soothed by this cautery from top to bottom; and that's the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are dripping from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not profit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feels a rough walk as if with fremis; and if they are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are warmed, and scorched by the heat of the tears, it has need of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it an "injured cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you do three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be thus, two inches deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others two inches costal by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are two inches costal by the papers above; and align your hand with the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of two fingers at the joint.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you will apply a piece of sponge and wrap it with cloth to suck out the blood, then insert the spatula guided by two fingers where it is in the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Of the incision that is to be made on the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two fissures to the very surface which is on the bone, then make another division from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not very sharp, and this is its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the soft edge towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another division in the middle fissure up to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the fluid that has been taken by the blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and apply warm dressings with wine and oil and sage, and beware that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a great quantity of lukewarm water, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the evacuation of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a vein is accustomed to frequent bloodletting, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision is cloudy, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in perpetual pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know through these accidents that those matters and that cathartic do not come from many veins, and the treatment is useless if it is like this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one on either side. And start from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move towards the brain; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and apply layers of moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is healed, it is necessary that you rub the bone so that it begins to grow, then treat with exciting things that make it inflame.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and of colophony four parts, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to inflame throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of these things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing as iron; or seeds, as jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing things as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When a stone or another kind of thing that does not adjust to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a little violet oil or oil of sisament, then it helps with extraction; and when you do the treatment, and the nostrils swell when the treatment is done, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and thus the ear is above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work, then help with subtle pincers, from which the form is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then help with extraction using a subtle onion-like double instrument; and if it doesn't come out by this means, then make a hook of iron and put the head of the hook into the ear hole strongly, and swell what is around the hook so that the veins cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out in the form mentioned, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, then take glue from which one takes the bones, and put some cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not get better from all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear in this way: make an abscess swell with a vein, and spasms; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be as round as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suckers, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Here is the translation:
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as small and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel, then prepare the extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight: if no worms appear, then remove them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the vein from which it is the origin.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrowed below and widened above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the sufferance of the patient, then suck strongly all the way up the vein; do this often until all the worms are removed. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop up inside the vein with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not issue forth as we have said, then prepare distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which it is the origin, as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper narrowed below at a small hole, and above it has openings to distill; and to press down the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the filter and envelop it in cotton at the point of arrival; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then put inside the filter all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and it is the distillations that are warmed by fire, so that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have any perforation in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a new flesh growing inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from the front of the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes it happens that I saw a small hole, and I saw it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from the front, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which you see, it seems that you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opilation, then work on this spatula, whose form is like this.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and flat on the front and back all around, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opilation is from new flesh or a cord in the ear, then take it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until this flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilation is deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and lightly scrape with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation where the patient feels great grief in their hearing, perceive lightly, and be careful not to graze the nerve of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the bleeding comes out, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treating the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	It is the ulcer that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it happens that you treat them with tongs and tweezers, and clean them with a spatula of their roots; then apply on the vitriol ointment bruised.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not decay, then cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cautery practitioner after incision is useless; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	of the poultice
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times they come in papers of the eyes things that seem like a poultice in their form and hardness, and because of this it is called "grandine", and it is an accumulation of thick moisture above and below; the operations are such: take warm water to remove the grandine from one part and another, and it's a light thing to know; make a large opening, then gently scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the poultice, do not hurt the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble it into a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it's small, don't apply force, for the ointments restore quickly and in an instant.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends to the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the poultice, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part and another; and if the poultice is separated by incision, it does not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty water oil, and cure the place of what restores quickly until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a strip of linen, and sets up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains excess flesh from each part, then places it on them; and presses with both hands on one side and the other, so that the excess flesh is gathered within the circle; then makes an incision in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel, cutting a slit no larger than the wound made in the vein opening; and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the excess flesh; and in many dispositions comes excess flesh from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Draw out then a piece of cloth charpit between your two fingers at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire scalpel up to the eye, lest you blind it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the excess flesh does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then enlarge the incision slightly so that it appears; then draw it out as we have said, then moisten the drapels in oil and water, and place them on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is delayed. Then heal them so they are healthy. And if an abscess forms at the shoulder, then heal it with poultices soothing until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born misaligned other than natural, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about manners of sickness such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so much that it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iii. manners: either by cautery assembled fire, or by medicine ague according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is made or by incision and costure or by caines, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, stick a needle at all .i. thread above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs are born beneath these hairs, and draw .i. thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then do in the part beneath the paper, beneath the misaligned hairs, all the spatula covering, from the great tear-duct to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a task to perform on someone who has a large quantity of paper according to the softness of the paper; then make a complete spacing between the lines that you have marked, and start from the great lyre just up to a small one; and let it be one of the natural folds near the hairs, then put the onion in one of the angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the lips at a sewing point of a needle with a subtle thread of wool, and squeeze out blood, and make a flow of superfluous threads on the eyebrows to all sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the sewing and threads up to three days or two; then treat the wound without sewing things that are dry and constricting, for the paper relives suddenly at the wound's closure and assembly of it, but the sewing is useless (as the ancients said), and this is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if you have another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three ounces of powder according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has .i. thread, and put it in the figure; and put .i. another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them evenly between your two fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have made a sign, as we have recounted, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerote and similar gentle ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and it often happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. wounds by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the surface of the parchment of the eye, and stretch the .ij. threads of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin that was stretched will mortify and putrefy and decay, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the wound has united forces, then cure it so that it may be healthy; and when the wound is cicatrized, and if the paper is lifted, and they do not prick the hairs anymore; and this is the form of the twelve canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the hunt another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the two threads; then put the patient's head in your healthy place; and let it be in the shade if possible, so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and minor work, then put the needle in all the hunt at the root of the hair opposite, and make it pierce into the paper hastily as much as you can pull it out above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put one of those hairs in the hunt, if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out at all the hunt on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hunt down to all the thread that you had ordered there, so that the hunt comes out of the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for twelve hours or thirteen, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair of natural whiskers, and elevate it with that which you leave, so that it may be elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rotting of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting of the eye occurs, it happens in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of working on it is that you split open the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put in thread of linen, and lay it so it may be healthy; and it does not seem to use in its cure things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but it works with mollifying things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or alembroth and linseed oil are cooked, and ointments of dyapulum founded on none of the eyes, and it envelops a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take heed so it does not swell according to its former shape; and these workings that we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is beneath and truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and prick the flesh, and make the left arm's vein bleed so much to the right, so that the threads join at the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is convenient, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the papyrus, and make two wounds or cuts within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two wounds at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made into an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has no "griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are cut beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure with what we have said about mollifying medicines and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or cut or cautery, it is convenient that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same diseases, according to what is convenient for treatment and more dispositional remedies.
dou soudement de la papiere	you should cauterize with a paper instrument
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this cauterization has its effect on men in such a way that the paper above is sodden with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform their natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, where you gently scrape off the assembled parts, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and it is all healthy, and there are no more frequent problems in the oily area, and the lifted watery discharge, and of the collar; then put between the paper and oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg whites; and after three days use sweet collars and soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It knows that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard crust, and another which is not nervous but seems like a white moist congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and pinch it with pincers, it cannot be removed; and one and the other have a similar effect towards the large artery, and gradually increase until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the scalpel does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision pour a little of the bruised oil into the eye, and make a dressing with litarge, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, many times it is cured with a similar type of nail medicine; and grows as I have related in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the scalpel lightly a little agitated according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes little by little and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the eye a dressing made of litarge and red ochre and bruised oil, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same method of opening, until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as if an abscess forms, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh is damaged by the armorer's night in the eye through great nuisance, if it suspends from the onion, and in coping with one part and not all, that the course of tears does not come; then distill in the eye a reddish-colored collyrium made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the knee
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Their eyes grow red like a rose of baluster, and cover the knee and restrain it with bandages and turn to the doctor, and seem; and the work is that the patient puts his head in his healthy state, then opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as uncines convenient to that, and supports it with force; then copes the first flesh, and goes entirely to the raspator until the end, and guards that no blepharitis affects the eye at the work; and is the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces of what one esteems, just as the form appears after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then anoint the eye with a broiet or distill a reddish-colored collyrium and apply medicines corrosives, and put on the eye a cotton with egg white, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the wound begins to suppurate, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the abscess with soothing things that calm the hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make all the characters that are adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they obstruct the sight with their work and weaken the eye for many years. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine if the eye is in this state, whether it is strong or not, and there is no other illness beyond the vein; then you should coil it in such a manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double veins be according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the vein be divided into degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then one coils the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extracts the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins that were full of oil; and beware that you do not block the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with only those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collier to corrupt what is more stubborn than the cataract.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot coil all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to calm the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you open on the abscess, there where it must be cleaned, and draws out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the corruption and blackness, if it has taken on all the appearance of what is its form; and it is called "rough head", and it must be made into a feir inde a .i. chief reont, and it must be pointed like a lime as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the healthy part of the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so you feel that the corruption is reduced; and do this several times, then restore the healthy part with medicines that are excitants.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the eyes are cloudy, and there is no birth, and the body of the bowel is cloudy, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the hole of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron, and by bitter medicines, and when it is discovered thus take .I. foret according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated until the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place on the bone of the forearm, and detach your hand from the eye a little, then turn the entire foret until it pierces the bone and feels the patient through this, since the veins are in it if he holds his hand against his nostril; and then restore the healthy part with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is born and endures the eyes, thus one sees the matter at the nostril; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Because of the tearing apart of a torn vein.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the torn vein, then open it, and insert a paper thread as if it were a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you want to repair it, the procedures are such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part just below, then put another needle where there is a double filament from the affected vein; and make them pierce, and leave the first needle in place according to its disposition; then cover the affected part with a double filament and bind it around the torn vein, and hold it firmly, then remove the needle and put it on the moist eyelid in abundance of water; and let it be until the filaments unite with the vein, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy; and never restrain the wound by binding it with a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then prick with a subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and correct the moist albugeanum and descend below the eyes, and enter there immediately; then hold until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	the veins of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the similarity of the veins in the division, and it is necessary to pierce; if you work according to health. It is necessary that you hold the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye firmly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a hair at the white part of the eye at the side of the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the clear thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune-like notch up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you see the opening in this paper by the clarity of the woven fabric, and then put the instrument near where the vein is, then press it down one way after another. If the vein descends now, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a little, and if the vein rises again by the second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly while turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the vein a little of that same gem, and remove from that eye within. Then put besides the eyes stooping or cloudy in oil rosset and abundance of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. Us, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the marrow cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is of this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce the conjunctiva subtly, and do not go too deep in the fontanelle, but make a subtle hole, then inject the marrow as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient .i. sleeping, while he sleeps on his back in .j. a dark place; and be deprived of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do not do this during the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water mounts hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If abscesses come, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on his face .i. a golden rim to cover for some days, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its cases; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the country of Yrach, who told us that in his country they made an instrument to pierce the marrow, with which they sucked out the water, but I never saw any in our land, nor did I read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly arranged:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And thus the head of the bones of this same subtlety, and the last in four angles alike.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No time is born or nose flesh joined in various ways, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if it has such flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In this case of those flesh which is soft and not fixed, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the onion at those flesh, and treat them with fire; then grasp what you can sustain in the subtle spatula on one part, so that you know that this flesh is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if you are not mounted above, or an abscess forms, drain it as it should be; and if they are malignant apostemes, hasten to cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is burned away, then pour in wine or vinegar and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the veins do not open, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, although the instruments do not come for cutting: then it is necessary that you prepare .i. a thread of flax slightly thick, and be careful with our hands, and hold between each thumb's width .i. or less; and place the patient's head on the thread at his nose, and draw out in an odorant manner until it comes through the nose inside the mouth; and many times children do so as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other in being like us who are on the thread. Do this until you know that the veins have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then place a cane of plum trees for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp overturned, like a cane, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease occurs on the nose called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so it is visible when looked at; and for this reason you must cover it at the beginning, and remove all hair, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay covering until it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense: if not touching with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one covers it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cover everything, then look at the patient and cover it with sense and fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is covered and bandaged
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when continuous flow comes into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, for in some homes. Therefore, you must take care that this does not happen to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then join the .ij. veins to a costure, then cure until it is healthy; and if the veins are already disjoined from one part and another, you must scrape all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the .ij. veins to a costure, and restrain, and powder with powdered dragon's blood, and incense burnt; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of veins, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them as pinces and cover in each part; then apply the remedy after the incision of vitriol broth, so much that the wound is stained; and then leave it to heal, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is an abscess on the gums which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with tongs, and cut to its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on the spot vitriol powder, or other drying and constricting powders; and if that abscess returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cut a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatment for covering.
des sordens	of the ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are rough and bitter; and sometimes the black, citrus, and greenish teeth, as much as the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you hold the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws be in your care, and take out the teeth or scabs appearing, so that nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, as much as they are worldly; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to rework on the second day and the third, until you have taken everything; and know that teeth have mastery of diverse forms of treatment for reworking, according to what the work demonstrates, because the root which one removes from the teeth has other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others will be with you, well-equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay treating as much as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then one has no excuse for delaying.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Here is the translation:
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently press it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously. And if the tooth is perceived and gnawed, it must be filled with threads, where the roots are; and if it is held subtly in the gums, so that it does not break while extracting; and it must work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient through the malice of the large root, causing greater pains than before. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have mentioned; but they come often by the obstruction of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or because the cartilage breaks, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the burnt vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which one must use to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so that they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let there be large limbs so they do not bend in the traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the traction, it is necessary that you place on the cotton cloth moistened with burrage. One day or two., as long as the limbs are numb, then they put on the clamps called "algefri", from which the head seems like a beak of a sign; and let them be made thus as a lime and it is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to issue into all these clamps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", it is to know the palate, from which it is their shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has ten inches, from which there is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which there is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are certain illnesses where the ancients did not teach at all about the diversity of instruments, and it is not broken into a chariot or other bones, or it will rot, if one seeks these instruments that they need, as I have told you, and help with gestures, from which there is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and support; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it seems that you know the teeth are not born after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot make it firm or fasten: then take the root; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a shape like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened to a point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take the instrument little by little in your hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can fasten it, then fix it with a thread like this is its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the thread of which one makes the needles; and fix the tooth little by little in your hands daily lightly, so that it does not move until it holds; then apply a smooth surface at the end without any roughness, and if the tooth is too pointed and it hurts the tongue, if you need to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth falls out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the front tooth falls out, either by percussion or by decay, and the patient cannot chew because it hurts, and you have treated them with medicines that constrict, but it does not work; if you need to restrain it with a thread of gold, for the silver thread turns green and putrid, but the gold does not move at all; and so the thread should be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double the knot between the sound teeth, then place the teeth among the bad ones, if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and so your ligature is at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then cut the threads with a pair of scissors, and assemble them, and replace them between the sound tooth, and set it in place so it does not bite the tongue; and then leave it in place as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, hold it in place with another thread; if it stays in place, it will serve for a long time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the sound teeth, and of the bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, you put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not get involved with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth from an ivory tusk, and you set it in place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of burning the ligature of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	It never happens that the ligatures which come from under the tongue or naturally, do not grow back; or by accident of a wounded palate; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligature of the large one, so much that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is roughness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you anoint with unguent and cut the large ligament; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the water of rose and of hazel, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and every night, anoint the patient's gums, so they cannot suck. And if a flow of blood comes, put on the head vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for that; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the flesh of a color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it is declining into whiteness, and there is moisture, anoint with unguent, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part to another; and if the wound does not heal through your operation, put on vitriol bruised until it is stained, then return to your operation until you treat everything thoroughly; then lift up the water of hazel and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Here is the translation:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You can't press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the amulet, and make the trajectory above where you can; and don't take anything from the tiles with, then cover the instrument, because it is the form that seems a force; and always the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very agile, and is made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument at hand, so cover it with tourniquets, because it is the form.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one part, and naming on the other part; and when you have covered one of the amulets, so cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and warm and clear, and if blood evacuates, so gargle the patient warmly, or apply cures of green pomgranates that are cut up, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; then cure until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat besides these .ij. amulets, so cover them thus as the .ij. amulets are applied.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which was a small abscess of little sense; and it had almost closed up the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed .ij. roots through the .ij. perforations of the nose. I hastened to treat her then, and placed an onion in one nostril, then made a trajectory above, and extracted a large portion of pus; then I repeated the procedure on the other side of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that I placed the onion in those abscesses, and covered part of it, and only issued a little blood; and thus was unclogged the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not cease to cut into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the void I had emptied, so much that it grew very large; then I treated her deceitfully and cauterized inside her throat: thus it remained unclogged; and I departed from those regions, and knew only God would do with her after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the vein is deep in the vein, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is thick and round, it is called a "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme is appeased, and it is subtle; then it is necessary to cut. And the one which is round and assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of fused color or black, then it is necessary to cut into it. For there is great peril for the patient. Then it is necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, by its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the needle into the vein, and draw it back, and cut with the instruments I have said in the incision of the veins. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluousness that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the veins, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use fire cautery instead. And the manner of cautery is sharp and pointed. And it is that the patient puts their head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have said or the chapter of cautery, and confirms with a lively and sharp movement, so that it is not too dense nor too clear; and in using the movement of this instrument, by which it is formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have on the head a veil or om which puts the medicine, as if the movements of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the vein; and let the patient sit on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth to the medicine inside, so it does not descend into the throat, and the blister; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the vein for a quarter of an hour, until you see it is reduced and the mordications of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the vein; and do this often, until the cauteries are perfected, then let it dry, and apply afterwards for 3 or 5 days. And if you need to renew the fire of the medicine, then rekindle it, and after the cautery, pour out what is inside the vein, from cotton plugged into a pipe, and clarify what is around the medicine; and be raised by sharp cold, and be cured of gagging as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not that of the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put aisil, and make boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in it have an instrument that is arranged in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted into the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, repeat often, until the eye dries out, and take care that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do it more frequently than during the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a tuft of egg white into the head, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the tuft of egg white does not allow the vapor to bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether, healthy.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens to the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear and is retained in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and attach the sponge to the thread, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will be recognized, and then you will extract further; and if it does not come out according to what we have said, take an instrument for probing in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instrument be at the head so it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high upraised; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may come to harm, nor thrust the bone within; and it is of value that the patient himself thrusts the instrument, because it seems easier thus; if he thrusts below, where he draws it forth evenly throughout the entire instrument, so it may be drawn forth.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the swelling of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine can cure the swelling, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then gaze into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the swelling, draw it out completely with a small hook, or subtle pincers that are worth it. And if it is not valuable, take a hooked hair, and thrust it into the throat of the patient, then thrust or bend the hooked hair with iron heat, and make it so often. And if you hold the patient's water throughout the day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and gargle without swallowing, and move it with his own hand often; and if you feel the swelling feels the cold, shout.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not shout as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asphaltide, at the instrument that I have told you in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will soon be calmed. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are charcoal embers, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that perforation let the head of the instrument be; then pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue forth, but comes just to the swelling; and the swelling will now be calmed, and if it does not shout, then recommence the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient to thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and drink no water; and then it is necessary that he urinate freely by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the blood, it is, when one can see it, similar to a curved tenaille entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak of a sign, and it has the roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many types of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways, one is in its own appearance, and because of what it holds in moisture. And the second way is through the veins where they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its completion; and if there are such ones that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, one should pierce it thus so it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is from the foundation, so it does not putrefy within, and becomes inflamed, and creates a fistula; and it cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it's when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and the adjusting of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be of long duration of the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no putridity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, it bursts according to the member. And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is worthwhile to let the perforation be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the body will be filled with much putridity; and perhaps the lips and the inner parts of the body will harden. And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to the member that has need of it.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of ulcers
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the wounds of a chief vein come from small abscesses, and are ways for us to be in tiles, just like the joint of a gully, and there are many similarities. There is fat and such things where there is moisture, just like poultices; and if there are hard and pierous things to cut with, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act against it. And the work of the cutting is that you try everything .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then it swells from above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and in oil, and apply to the wound, and let it be until another day; and this corrects what has remained of the nit. And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not remain of the nit; then treat the ointment wound according to what is suitable, so that it may be healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, from the length; and apply your remedies, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment in order to cure the wound where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, then do what I have told you afterwards. And do the same for the abscess if it is pierous, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting into the pierous abscess and the moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these .i. abscesses that I cut open or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a rotten stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had not made any effort, one would have done as well to make a wound from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the chief, for those that come from the chief of children and the roots of the ears, the operation should be done in at most three days, depending on how much it is necessary to remove the swelling; and the treatment should be done as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times have abscesses occurred at the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groins, and many times they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are entwined with each other. And each tumor is specifically located on its side, just like the swelling and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities between these tumors are many. There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, you see a good disposition in the body, and it appears similar to the color of the body, and changes on each part and is not airy as the veins at the neck or in the artery, and is not deep; so it is necessary to cut above them, and to dissect each part, and to expose the two levres of the heart as oncines, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take it slowly, and be careful that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not let the spatula slip, lest you cut too much, so you do not touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put vitriol broiet in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you accomplish it; then inquire into your duty if there remain small tumors, if you cut and mend them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the tumor, it does not matter that you cut that tumor at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton plugged into an Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire tumor, it is necessary that you reassemble the two levres of the wound, and sew them now, so that there remains no excess flesh due to the size of the tumor. It is necessary that you intend to cut at its root, and remove the excess, and sew as we have said. Those tumors that hold excess flesh, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce it thus as described above, depending on the case, then treat it with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well mended, cure it with ointment and heating charm, until it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke and talked of the incision of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleaned; and one should not help with this, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the gullet, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it between two or three circles, or a small cutting through, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cutting through the syphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and thus it is necessary to make the cut at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all the surrounding area, then cut the heart as far as it reaches the trachea; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the syphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the flow of the trachea which stops being fruitful through the place that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with a gentle touch, and sew everything beneath the sense without the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One should not do this just so long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacking in breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then one should cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore command the old one to let the open wound be so that the evil of the disease passes, and it has passed in three days or in two days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they command to bandage the wound and treat, until it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a small knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of the arm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called for by the healer, and I found it thus as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered with a dressing or bandage except for the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I had not harmed the maiden for she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Because I see that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural does not have any obstruction.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two ways, one of which is similar to a thick swelling in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to work with fierce fires except in the one that is small, and he tries and searches everywhere for the entire internal arrangement.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as if in a thick swelling, and it does not penetrate to any vein, then it stops, just as we stop the nose, and he draws to his entire coffin, if there is a point.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and heal it so that it covers, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and therefore it is suitable that I should point out all the differences that exist between them and this.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that this is a crisis and fever, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it is accompanied by putridity; then the fever and crisis settle.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the ninth node it has no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains a flux, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their appearances, whether grave, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "intermediate", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or touch the moist place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the greatness of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this that it knows how to make a good scar.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moist corrupts the short, whatever its color may be, thus they do as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entromissoire no moistness comes, it knows that it is fatty, thus they do then in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the cotte where it lies, so you pull it straight with the nail;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it straight, then pull it by pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he remains still, then returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he stays still a little, and the wound does not grieve him, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things to calm the hot abscess, and treat with other treatments until he is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is a large wound, then cut the lips of the wound, and treat what injures the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is bursting, it's contrary or otherwise, hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol, and let it stay for two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and then repose the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what has been delayed from the outset.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles with which one cuts the sorescles, and are of citrin iron, or of silver, or of copper, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing the knots of fistula;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three knots in three kinds similarly;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are lancets that have three knots, and they are of three kinds; and if there are lancets that have two knots, and lancets with a single knot only, and they are of three kinds; and all this is necessary in their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is to those who make them cutting, and of such there are some that do not cut more than a part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introjections are the alkaline remedies applied to the handles, so that the patient does not perceive themselves at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use more than the clear charcoal, as for legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar things.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and many times one makes another small instrument, similar to thongs of fisticuffs, according to this form, where one staunches blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one places it many times at the healthy spot which joins the veins, and the arteries, and many times one encounters according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Many times they swell the limbs of certain men when their corruption begins, so much that they seem like feminine limbs;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they become lazy and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, if one knows how to operate according to this form of these lines, right up to G.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine in a gentle circular motion, then assemble the lips of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and the breast is sloping downwards, and it is amazed by its greatness just like it happens with women, if they make a .ij. ribcage above, through similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin which is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the deterioration of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it digests the residue and fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	from abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that grow under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Here is the translation:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire swelling that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply a dressing to make it healthy again.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is sewn which is above, then often come abscesses, and also it has swollen veins and abscesses.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes it thus when it is by the artery, then are the abscesses long in depth;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel strangulation; and when it is by the vein, then are the signs of fever appearing;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the arms and in the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who has an inflamed artery, a bandage is placed above the skin of the loin;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the incision at the shoulder blade, and carefully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then put a needle underneath it, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the spot which is between the two ligaments of an intermuscular space, as far as the blood flows out of it, and thus release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that brings down the swelling, until the ligament is freed;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal this one of anointing coming to this one, so long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscesses are because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then lance the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as one binds a twisted thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, if it breaks another needle altogether at the spot of the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess as much as the excess flows out, then cut away the excess from around the heart and let go what is tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply remedies of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nostrils
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often with the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and this is a severe abscess, and its color appears like the color of a dead body, and it is in many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one strains forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it is not as deep in the body, but beneath the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it moves badly in all directions, and does not go either forward or backward, neither below nor above, and the one who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction by chance;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or at the forehead, makes the skin on the Spartumile (a type of skin lesion).
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if you hold it with a bandage, and cut at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if you support it with a poultice, and scrub, then scrape the bone and bring the wound together at the seam, and cure until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of thick, hanging lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never does it occur in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness which is called "fungus" by the similarity to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and thick heads; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had .ij. or belly which was more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little root, and was always cut, and corroded with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you consider if the patient's moisture is excessive, and the color of the arterial root is whitish and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you hold the spatula broadly, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when the surgeon comes, there are often too great evacuations of blood, and if you do not take heed, then hasten to give the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient is fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread of cotton, and tie the arterial root as we have said, and leave it for 8 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not stop restraining the thread of the probe as long as it touches the joint, and it will work by itself; and if the roots are thick, fear not to cover in the meantime for the belly, but you can cover half well.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	Here is the translation:
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is through the rupture of the skin and the issuing of the bowel, if the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And it is through the issuing of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers if it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And it is through moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain; and if it is through blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and it is through windiness, if it is swollen to the touch, and the works are that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Here is the translation:
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and let it be straightened out completely, then sign from below around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he must sit between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then goes into the place where you have signed to the entire spine,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then is the majority of the abscess above all the large uncle;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it firmly with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk, and be the nails strongly bound.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open most of the abscess spread out on the thread, and you should indicate with your finger, and drain the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it attached to the thread, then detach it, and empty the intestine at the lower part of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it on the ankle, and cut away the excess flesh.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and you should make the artery opposite, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and insert nine strong threads, and insert the nine needles inward so that you have made a cross that you may feel piercing;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it suppurates, and kill the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you find it when it is subtle and putrefied, then treat what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb with what is necessary, and sew the limb up.
dou chancre	swollen tumor
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the appearances of tumors, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure with iron; and we say that the tumor grows in the marrow, and requires great caution in its cure, and the ancients said that when a tumor is in the flesh or where it can be reached if it is like a tumor which is in the mammary glands, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one should remove everything when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I cannot heal anyone of them; no one has ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in the flesh or where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has manifest repletion, then perform the operation .i. dig into the flesh to do the operation; then cut out your tumors or tumors, and shave all parts, and remove all bones without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the flesh with your hand or anything, and see if the decorations of blood make you counterindicate the incision of the artery or vein, if it needs to be cauterized so that the wound is stitched; then cure with another cure until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	Here is the translation:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look if the hydropisy is turned towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the navel .iij. two fingers right above the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then let your incision be on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's due to spleen, then let it be on the right, and it doesn't matter that the patient guides themselves towards the incision so the superfluous ones don't flow to that weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin to the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatium between the skin and the syphac as if scraping out a quantity of an ounce or a small container; then pierce the syphac until the spatium comes to the evacuated spot, and it's the level of the water, then draw it back, and it's the shape of this instrument, which is like a subtle silver tube, and made of tin or light copper, with a small hole below .i. a small perforation; and where it costs one part .iij. perforations; and .ij. on another part, and .i. on another; and it's the head cut like a pen, and it's the shape of the incision that the writers cut with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top above is the scalpel, if it happens that when the instruments come to the water, then descend now onto the instrument; empty the donor of half or a third part, because if you empty more than what is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he becomes pale, or approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but in the void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the heart which stops up the passages that are on the skin, as I have spoken, that you perceive in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take from the water a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do it no day, and keep yourself from pouring too much water, but only a little. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or dry heat, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and if you abstain from drinking; and the treatment with desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born who does not have passages in the penis, or the passages are small, or it is not in its place. If you want it to be perceived altogether, then make a very subtle spatula according to this form: then put the passage in a subtle hole, and bind it thus with a thread, for three or four days, and when it wants to urinate, if you open the closure, and let urine flow, and then replace it; and by chance you will not find any problem, because the urine that comes forth does not leave the closure.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies thus on their back, with the top of the rod and the handle also like the length of a pen, so that the pierced place is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the pimples on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts grow on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should take them with a subtle onion-like treatment, and cut and clean all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment with diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then you should apply cauterization. When you have cut it out, and if the cyst is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is extracted, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the top of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come in its place, and the wound becomes infected; so you should remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which has been prepared with powdered pomgranates and veal, then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the flow of blood comes, then arrange the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries help with nine dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must push or conduct a tube of lead through the patient; and when the skin is dry at the top of the rod which has not been circumcised, either because of a wound or an abscess, then you must scrub it with a nine-edged instrument so that the veins are freed, and the head of the rod is delivered from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a severe case to consider, then you must scrub with a nine-edged spatula at the top of the rod and skin; then separate gently between nine, and I put a subtle layer of linen on the wounded part in cold water, so that it does not become inflamed again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Here is the translation:
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Here is the translation:
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	On the modification that is made to all the thread of the file I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, you cut equally in all directions; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and it should be the method of the first work if it is that you make the infant think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer by binding the thread around the rod too tightly, and then you can make it slide in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the children do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; then mend well the disorder that is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below another thread; and hold it as two links by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and cope between the two links, then lift the heat above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on and on the powder a drapil glueit of a mixture of egg yolks cooked in rose water, confectioned with oil of roses and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it may be healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Here is the translation:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mundification is when the heart within fails at the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch to your finger, so that the veins make an abscess; and the scalp equally, and if you cannot hold with your finger, the tendons will take hold, and then the scalp.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and what is beneath the rod is inflamed, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the crust is lightly scraped; then you will cover as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, which will not harm them at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if you cover beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Here is the translation:
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from the top of their back, and hold the patient's arm as far as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine does not flow.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument called "siringue", whose form is: and let it be of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and let its cane be one palm long and half, and let it be subtle at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip of a piece of flax or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the siringue; and cover the superfluous part of the flax and tie it just at the tip of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and honey of August, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the verge with moist oil of olives and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently insert the siringue into the verge, until it reaches the root of the verge, then bend the verge back towards the belly; then insert the siringue before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the thing seen, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or it goes astray; then stretch the thread little by little along the flax, and the urine follows the flax, then extract it, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and apply the syringe until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or pus accumulates in the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see them distill aqua and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the jugular vein leads through which the medicine flows so well that it stops the urge sensibly, if one can then draw out the moisture, and push back when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you want to put your medications in the bladder, place the chief of the cauterizer in the moisture, and draw the drawing which is inside; if you draw the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly reinsert it inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and it is the subtle form of the instrument for injection, which one uses to inject the bladder: thus it is;
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below is the vein or the ligaments of the back; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it between two double fillet threads, and heat that moisture over the fire; then place the chief of the injector in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder as all the moisture flows, so that the patient feels that the moisture has now arrived at the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a thong, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and the extraction with assembled medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys as they rain, and all the signs, and how one must operate on the size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the kidneys in the bladder often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtlety; and I openly declare, and greatly afflict the patient's penis, and they often repeat, and then become inflamed; and many of these jumps are the foundations; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in the elderly, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with aclyster, in order to expel all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and turn them over onto their back, if the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and it falls many times from above; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands are below their thighs, so that the bladder is completely upside down; then you ask and touch from inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Here is the translation:
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he puts on the spatula-like instrument, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left nipple; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides should be equal or at the fundament, and let the incision be so large that it traverses as far as the width, and within it is constricted, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Perhaps the press if the two that are at the fundament, so it does not feel laborious work; and know that there is a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is gripped to come out; and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a glob, and rounded, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	At that place where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with the tenaculi that are like a file on the head, to extract the stone so it does not break; or you put underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small pertus, and if the sensibility is uncovered, then extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out with force, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, it is necessary to operate, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes back through the same place that the wounds cannot close; but in any case you must strive to treat, or to break up the tangles, as much as you can treat them piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then resolve the patient back into their bed, and do not undo the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you undo it, rise well the bed of oil and water, then apply the ointment of dyaphinicon and ointment of basilicon, as much as is needed to be healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the hot abscess comes to the wound and corrosion, and congeals the blood in the bladder, and holds back the urine, which is known in such a way that without it mixes with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and help in all ways that you know, so it may be healthy; and it is necessary that all the openings that you treat, that you bind the joints, and assemble the medications on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot flow out; if you treat what I say thus, that you cut many times, it is an excuse for cutting through this treatment. I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a iron rod in this shape and it should be at three angles fixed in the tongs:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take the thread and bind it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the iron rod in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if it comes out soon, the urine will flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is within the rod. If it is thus broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then place the son below the stone and another above, then make the stick straight in the area of the stone between the two ligaments, then hold fast the arrow, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Since the stone is often found in women, and if it happens to anyone, then the cure is difficult, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, because it covers with a deeper cut, and great fear is there.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and grasp the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle mirror; and she presents a well-aged life in the lives of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust her finger or foundation and inquire about the stone; and if she finds it, then she constrains beneath her finger, and recommends that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in the form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder up to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then touch on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let it be cut at the first small size.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the razor in the cut, if you feel the stone if it grows into the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have roots. If you know the similarities to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood flow is failing, put a glass vitriol broiet on the spot, and hold it for an hour until the blood flow is established; then return to your work, so that the stone is pierced, and have the instruments I told you about in extracting the stone, as men will help you with your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flow is failing, and it's because of a blocked artery, put powder on the spot and hold tight with tourniquets and bandages, and do not restart this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it anymore, lest the patient might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are restored, then return to your work, so that the stone is pierced.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Here is the translation:
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining yellowish, or without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, .i. a short time as the figure of an egg, and it does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white saphac, he feels it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the introverted quarter, because its form is thus beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introversion, judge from that which is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should be placed on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and much of the drapery should be spread under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he should sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs near the hollow of the groin.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just to the point where it pinches, and let your incision be entirely straight while dividing the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and carefully scrape off the thin skin according to what you can do.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put in your hooks, and the white spot will be above; and do not touch the joint of the hip, but let the white spot come out solely; cut everything or in pieces from the same side subtly, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the vein bursts for a lot of work, if you reassemble it in its place when you will have completed the vein of the white spot; then assemble the two lips of the joint of the hip into one suture, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you raise the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspended places, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is assembled in two parties gathered, know that they are two branches; if you cut the other party just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moist ointment of oil rose.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put afterwards another moist dressing in wine and oil, and put on the two cushions, and put above doubled drapery, and tie it all together with the lien that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two drapery, and fill with lint according to this resemblance, and let them be assembled by stitching in the girdle of the arm, and one of the heads takes hold at the bottom just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and another two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is medicine applied to this cautery of fire in the form of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the cushions, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the wound is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the fire cautery according to this method, and pierce that place with an onion-shaped instrument, and scrape with this subtle cautery burn:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the cup in all the ways that you can, so that you scrape everything; and beware that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the corruption of blood, and beware of the bad practices of surgery.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or an abscess bursts or corruption of blood or other thing, if you heal what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is faint-hearted, and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horribleness, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining water, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and let the white cloth not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one treats the watery discharge of hydropics; thus the shape is formed before; and enlarges .i. a little the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth leaving;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad humors; and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive bitter anger and anguish, which is spread through bad humors, or from a blow.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are painful abscesses and piercing, and of a dark color, and sometimes it comes from a narrowing of the artery, or an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the formation of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it with your hand.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from an inflammation of the vein is recognized by its appearance at the point of tender touch of the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well make a cut on this similarity, and on other scars;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then stretch the vein above, and remove the white crust from the surface, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already inflamed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you remove the vein, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the crust, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of flesh is behind the true skin, then it is necessary that you take all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then fill the wound with mulled wine and rose oil, then heal it with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like swelling resembling a .i. boil, with the softening of the groin,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient must complain greatly when they go;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this illness is well nearly as painful as this one beforehand,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then bind the suspender of the loins below your two fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	For all the vessels that are close to the edge, and prick the masters, and stretch them out strongly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut into the spatula-like instrument, cutting deeply through to the spot where the vessels are, until they are discovered;
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the blood flow has come, and then tie it again to another vein;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then they take a straight measurement, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupting moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as if the others or inject a poultice, so that no vessel bursts that nourishes one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this means no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this ulcer are by the section that comes from the face, or the extension onto the belly in the part of the loins, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the flanks;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this treatment is from the face or from its extension, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from lifting a heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it comes gradually and slowly, in long tension, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses equal right up to the peritoneum, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the swelling, which makes sudden pain come at the beginning, and it is diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's weakness from the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is retained inwardly, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron to fear, because they think it will hurt them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to reintegrate the intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and cover all the skin of the joints from the loin.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then thrust inside the veins of the waist, uncinate according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the skin that is beneath the leather of the joints, so much that the white skin beneath should be uncovered on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin beneath the leather of the vein, and between the second skin,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate that which is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white skin above with your left hand, and lift the vein to all the skin towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and dislocate that which is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you have two fingers in it, if there is a point of the intestine wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts into the belly below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or it has a large thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the soft syfac, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, so long as there are three threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two threads.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two threads, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into it, lest an abscess forms there.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and set the bandage according to the first long band, two inches of that one, and after these two bands leave enough space which is beneath the heart of the joints, the width of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg produces; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the joints, until the saneness corrects it, and the swelling, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then mix the millet in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will mix the bandage that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is it cauterized with a white cloth as we have said, after the incision, because of fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens often, and let the vein gush as much as it pleases; and if it delays in healing, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who knew how to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done thus as the ram's horn which is assembled on the nose, in such a way that you bind the veins, after cutting lightly underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cauterize in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who have a rupture, until the veins are clear; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No rupture ever occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the loins; and do not descend into the intestines as to the bowels, and if they do descend, it is little, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always, if it stays too long at this point, the wound or abscess grows, so that the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this has happened through the extension of the soft tissue which is like a cloud, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and weakens the limbs and opens them.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and no cure is made with iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then feels the limb of the injured part according to the quantity of two fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the soft tissue that is under the skin which is swollen, then take the remedy and place it on the apparent limb of the soft tissue.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and you press on the fontanelle of the belly, then cut the jugulars appearing on the syphac on the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch the syphac point where the vein extends to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the curvature of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the threads, if it is undefined and heal the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphac is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is easy to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and to cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, first remove the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and sews the thread.
dou chastrement	of the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I know that punishments are established in our law, and therefore I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so except for .ij. manners: one of which is that the masters respond when asked, and heal; and the other, because we often have need of punishing some beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say therefore that punishments are made according to .ij. manners: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, so long as the skin is mollified and pendant; then take it with your hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel it. Of the punishment of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each part with a .i. cope, when you have well searched them; and leave none of the subtle tissue and the subtle tissue that is under the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more moderate than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction sometimes some thing of the thighs remains, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Here is the translation:
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here is the translation:
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tetanus is a twisted cord on the natural part, so much it is too ugly to see; and some women have had it as large as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the excess of tetanus from your hand or fingers, and gently stroke; and don't go too deep in the wound, lest corrupted blood flows, then treat with another remedy until it is healthy; and on another twisted cord that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the remedy, and by chance it bursts forth, and it resembles a cow's disease, and for this reason they called it "cow disease" in old times. It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said regarding tetanus, and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is born naturally, or occurs by accident due to illness that comes about; or it is a twisted cord, or subtle and hidden, and it is made in the marrow, or in the costal area, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and childbearing, and by chance the flowers have; and the knowledge of this is through the gaze of the baile. The stoppings are near appearing, if you want to know. If it is a subtle and hidden cord, and it is near the .ij. livres, hasten, and turn thus: put your .ij. fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then bend the .ij. livres forward, so that the subtle and hidden cord is turned, and is over the stoppings; then take a linen cloth, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the spot, and guide the woman to home every day, so that she cannot conceive. And if the cord is hard and hidden, it is necessary that you treat it with the spatula-like instrument resembling a foil of myrtle. If the stoppings are of a new cord, suspend it at the navel and stroke; and take the medicines cleansing the blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, ensemble abun d'uef; then apply a large poultice; so that the wound cannot conceive; and thus it will be long, and apply a tent of linen thread; then treat with other treatments until it is healthy. And when there is a new cord in the marrow, it is necessary to treat it according to this method, if it is not an aposteme that grows. For at the growing aposteme which is in the marrow, one must not touch or do anything.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The expert is first at the examination to know the figure of the natural swelling, and the signs are when you see the woman lower down, and desire to smell the air: then hasten the infants to issue forth; then know that this swelling is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under its chief, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, you must press gently on her belly, so that the infant issues forth; for when they descend under their chief, the second is with him, and the mother is rid of her superfluous fluids by good moderation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes onto its feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes onto the belly, or elsewhere, and is converted by a bad turn on its neck, and by other evil figures; thus it is necessary at the examination to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes onto its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtue of it is weak, then make her sit on a chair, or where the women hold her; and arose her nature from oil or fenugreek, which has been cooked, and then put the examination between her two little spatula-like fingers, which are the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and find the secondine, and touch her nail as much as the moisture that is in correspondence with the fetus; and press on the woman's belly so that the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cluster the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesame; then make her take a bath and anoint herself with conditioners, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant is born. And if the hands cannot enter, then you must gently guide them in and out; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet high; then remove the chair from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall at the removal; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then touch the hands to the counterpillow that is placed before, and extract the infant, and guide it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the issue of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant stands on its feet, if it wants to walk upright;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turns little by little, so that it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just above the elbows, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps further, then God wants it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump further as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a mixture of altaea, oil of sesame, and gum resin, and crush everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply it to the natural opening of the woman within and remove this joint,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in a warm bath up to the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is warmed up from below, make her a girdle of myrrh, and apply it to her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make them sit on a seat, then make them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and take the belly lightly, because the infant is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, then you put its hands little by little on its belly.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and be lying on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he places his hands little by little, and then he takes his hands on the belly, and he lifts the cushions from below, so that it is prepared downwards;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he does not jump, take his feet and move them gently, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands there;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold of it in such a way that the child settles.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to instruct how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise, and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and arrange her legs in a straight form;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then treat the muscle damage that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not swell, make it sit on a seat, then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and look at the child according to their natural figure, and make it stretch out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins are loose.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face is turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that the vein takes its hand, then turns it little by little, and looks at it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is equalized, then place on the natural muscle tone of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the secondary ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to doing this in the same manner for all the secondary ones, then couple the secondary one to your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the blow of the bow is not retained, and kills him;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then thrust the child inwards, as long as you have placed it thus as it should be, and instruct the woman that she should not take hold of it at any time:
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be more easily delivered.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins' birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Here is the translation:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live, if they can't be named;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the belly;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and none of them issue naturally as a whole, if we have said so.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, thus the cure is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it thick and light, doing what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as he values his health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, or seven, or many up to fifteen, and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is evident that the wise one knows all this, for by chance it seems that these things happened to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman who has had a stillborn child or a miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not succeed, and you are constrained to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of good virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her hips be bent downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the thigh from below, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart during the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then anoint the mouth of the womb with oils moistened with musk and altaea and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then oil the bath with these oils and musks.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then insert them gently into the womb, then seek the location where they will settle in a suitable place, or she inserts the fingers so that they are comfortable there.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that the veins are prepared so they descend to their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you prick the onions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is on his feet, prick them or puncture and massage the moist areas;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and let him hold his whole hand lightly, and prick the onion in none of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the desired thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it's the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix an encounter with another onion, or the third you have in this profession, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are evenly stretched out, moving from one part to another, so that they may issue forth, and the onions are held in place by them, as it is their form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it remains in place, set this onion or higher on the joint, and make them do so until they issue forth completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by straightening,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then it is necessary that you wrap it in a bandage, so that it becomes whole;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the bandage on the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and in this way the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at birth, or it has an aching assembled chief,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then it is necessary that you put the spinous spatula between your two, and make the head straight and extract the aching.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you round it at the instrument which is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in this way, I make the children have a large natural head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones for the tendons,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head is strong and holds to the vertebrae, so be it joined, as much as the moisture that is or worse issues from it;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot issue, then cut into pieces at the joint that you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he stands on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch it with a draped enveloping hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and rub the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrodes.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are ossified, and the head remains.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	Here is the translation:
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he applies an onion or a warm poultice, and makes a gentle treatment.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the thigh is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be treated with effort.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then one must apply moist and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and use gentle, softening, and moistening remedies.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it upright, so arrange that which we have said about the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot operate, if one treats the wound by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary wound.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done that, arrange what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flows out, it should be stopped with a tight bandage, and other treatments should be arranged.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the other dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, wounds came to him in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began with great putrefaction.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel greatly, for this belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman soon felt relief, and immediately spat out a bit of bowel from her body.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to put the limb back in its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one adds the books; and at 10 turning points as 10 heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every way, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the wound be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one palm and a half long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and within them the ligaments should be two adjustments of this same wound, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tendons.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two joints, if you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you open the marrow to the entire instrument, if you make the woman sit on .i. bed, with her feet hanging and her legs extended,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to the entire instrument, if you have made the ligatures equally, according to the quantity that you saw opening the mouth of the marrow, so that the vein does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	Here is the translation:
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Here is the translation:
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in the womb, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and then make him sternly condition himself, and he holds your hands at the mouth and nostrils.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let him jump for this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If he cannot, take the pot and make a poultice or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the belly, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then put a cloth or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the belly.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let the blister form until the vapors come out of the marrow; then it will be sterile, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary swelling happens quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not flee, thus command the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or in a muscilage of alta, and then put it in its natural state.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek the secondary blister; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the marrow does not burst at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must move lightly to the right and to the left, and then be treated; if it comes and dislocates again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of sternument, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not all of what we have said, beware that you do not fall into mistreatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with ointment of four drugs;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Here is the translation:
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument is such that one smokes out the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, if it is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to see similar to a dog, and put the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tincture as long as it is exhausted, and recommence another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it has been stifled by subtle signs.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary therefore to apply a poultice that it perceives the subtle sign with its finger, and does not perceive it at all through a spatula or ague, and adjusts the bandage so it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not recover, then put or apply a compress of lead, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the infants want to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes there comes a sudden swelling of wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cut into that sudden thing: if it can be cured, as we have said about the treatment of a deep wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and larger than those that come from beneath the foundation of the body, or in the space of the adjacent parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is a fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and in the meantime moisture accumulates white or subtle pus,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and often these fistula patients; and are known by the fact that they have an evacuation or flatulence or wind when the patient makes an evacuation, and sometimes it happens suddenly without warning.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the penetrating fistula by its foundation, and it does not pierce completely.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you put your right index finger on the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistedness, if you apply a subtle touch of the tip of your thumb, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the touch or the hair on your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from a bad pertussive evacuation nor ventilation nor vermin, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that she does not perceive at all; if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if it pours out urine, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived up to the joint of the thigh, it is the tense vein coming up to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that he is thus bowed, and no medicine is of value suddenly by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the vain efforts of foolish doctors who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a tent of thread, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your finger index,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you feel then that the tenderness has been perceived; and it is discovered where you feel between your finger the systole or the flesh, then you know that it is persistent;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One heals all the way when one can well heal some, but this happens little.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done, if it is heated the subtle fire according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the entire hot thing in the fistula, until it comes from the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these cracked characters are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the many ulcers with a poultice, as long as the flesh is tender, then treat the wound by soothing and suddenly closing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healthy, it's good. If it is not, no other way can it be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the bottom, and place between your finger and the hold a thick covering of flesh or of suet, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the finger;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and thrust back before the hold, and then apply the cautery, as long as it reaches the head of the hold;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and it will be delivered the tent, and will fall; then I will define those worn-out chairs that seem a bird's feather, and none of them remain there.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, and becomes short between you and the skin, then cautery with fire or medicine is needed.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery assembles in this way: it is to know, the drying of those joined bones, and the stopping of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken pieces, as long as the eyes gaze downward, and it is necessary to burn the joined bones in the mud.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed from dry charcoal, and these are the drying medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the deep foundation, and is separated from the body, you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the thread or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no more than one way of faith and hope, through the management of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you apply the cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the fundament, or if you can set it in place and cure it as at first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the fontanel, lest you cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and come to the evacuations by the voluntary sensation;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it will be healthy, or you separate that covering and the wound then that it is cut from the fundament, either by tension or by another instrument pointed;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then define the faulty charter that is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the defective part of the foundation: if it is more comfortable for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And often fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you push the probe into the fistula, and it is where the costal bone of the foundation lies beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a sharp-pointed probe according to this form at the head;
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you thrust it straight into the fistula as far as the head, and insert the thread entirely into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is perforating in the margin of the underlying foundation within, then extract the thread from that which is pierced, so that you thrust your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head of the thread, and join the fistulae together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no more than once, until the threads grasp these flesh that are between the two, and hold fast;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then cure the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, if you make it burst in all ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper ligature if it is too deep inside, and then to cure, as we have said, so that it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal fistula that one makes if it is very narrow and constricted, and cuts through in a particular place.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, it is not so, because one should not touch what one should not touch, as you see here.
des emorroydes	of the sinewy parts
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Sinewy parts are according to two manners: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut off the blood immediately.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are deep in the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deep if they have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and immediately afterwards, a spot of citrus water or a spot of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a bedchamber, until the foundations issue forth, and appear the threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and bend it like tendons, or hold it on your finger, then cut it in its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and the uncle cannot hold them due to their moisture, if they take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them at your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then heal with other healings until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue forth, then clisterize the patient with a harsh and bitter cluster to clean that which is in the foundation, so that they can issue forth openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient cannot take it, and their vein is far from the foundation, then it is a light cure;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them by your finger or the nails, and catch, then cure as we have said, so that they be healthy, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then draw the thread above and make pierce the needle from another part, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too large; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a piece of cloth soaked in oil rose or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he should rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it cool down as much as it congeals, and when they are cooled, if you apply treatment of anointing and other treatments, until it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you dry out the mucus or fundament
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying of mucus in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you make a poultice at the point of a spatula or on an ulcerated spot, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal as soon as it is swollen so that it becomes healthy.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then restart the treatment more strongly than before, so that it heals much, and becomes scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal as soon as it is healthy.
dou fremit	because of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Here is the translation:
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the chill is found, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a string from a bird's feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and place that string on the cold spot, so that the circles surround the cold spot entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the string so that you grasp it entirely around the cold spot, and put it in the front, and extract the cold spot from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make it in the form of a cane of iron or copper, and be subtle underneath and stretch above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perceive, for you must hold with your finger and press; and if you see, if you cauterize the trembling flesh, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of theclyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make aclyster of silver or copper, or of tin alloy or maillet; and never make one of these small and large instruments, according to those who are accustomed to them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that one uses in the treatment of children and which are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, where the belly is tied according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has a perforation on one side .ij., and in the other .i.;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and let it be perceived all around with many small perforations,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let there be between each perforation .i. a space of an inch, then put in these perforations .i. strong thread of twisted thread, crooked in .x. or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if you hold the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse; and that's the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clister with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then insert it lightly:
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then sprinkle the ministers with their two hands together, so that it be all visible, then extract the clister, and raise the patient's legs to the bench,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to issue, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps one night entirely, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him for a disease of bowel obstruction, and the medicine hastens to expel it, then recommend it until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or an abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have previously stated in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remedy will come into its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if it takes care of itself, it's a matter of setting stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you carefully treat the abscessed swelling: if you make it almost healthy in the head measurement, so that little blood comes from the wound, and the healing is on the opposite side of the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to get healthier, so let his meat be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, abscesses heated by coming blood, cotton soaked in rose oil soothingly, or in wine steeped.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, put it on the wound, as long as it is fresh and its blood is not moved by air or powder, which I will tell you a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the patient's condition has changed, put it on some ointments, as long as they are healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a slash of a spear and similar things, and the lips cannot be assembled by themselves, then assemble them by stitching, as I will tell you about wounds of the belly, of the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is uncovered to the bone, and it is deep, and does not hold but for a little, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat, if they taste and smell roasted, like pork, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or acquire putrid matter, and it does not adhere to the bone, then remove all the putridness, and throw it far away, then apply the treatment.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which dries in this way so that the wound heals.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of the powder is: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so that it does not become inflamed; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And often one makes a poultice of hot ashes, when one has not the incense nor the blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved the wound, meanwhile in this state, one does not put less of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it pours forth a flow.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the other wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it steady with subtle pinches;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, if there is no other remedy than to let the treatment, and not to put anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soothing, thus heat the water in sweet oil, and mix it with rose oil, and cool the water thus in sweet oil.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other wounds of the mine according to this manner, and anoint them with moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind with bandages, then treat until it be healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick or pierce lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, that is the way to master it.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduct is guarded, because that's where the food goes.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	Here is the translation:
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and let it be for some days, then cure the joints with ointments until it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound putrefies;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it be disinfected and aligned with the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then perform the treatment as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound is ventilated, for if the patient does not expel air: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply into the wound.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and open the sore.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I will put an attractive bandage on it, and bind it three times a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have a bandage, put much cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and have the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 2 days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there does not come a spasm, nor an evil tremor of the heart, which is not a sign of alteration.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if she cannot heal, and operate, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether in front or on the back, then treat what is before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and remove the false feathers if they are dislocated.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound putrefy, then alleviate the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	about the obstruction of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The obstructions of the belly are great and moderate and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound often times the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, which prevents the intrusion of pus;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the injury is worse, and no time is better than a small wound than a large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one cannot put back into place the internal organs, unless they are replaced gradually and carefully.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return to their place,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and therefore it is better to heal the lesser wound, because one can reset the intestine in its place rather than others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the four common stitches have to do with the stitching of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitching of other wounds of the body and four other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestinal contents are forced out.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and grievous thing is to put back, this is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	where for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	where for the fact that the intestine is swollen by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is frostbitten, heat it up partially in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soften a sponge or a cloth with warm water and gently lay it on top,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	where you apply heat by squatting and piercing and puncturing,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until the inflammation is eliminated;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and many times they make these restraining bands, and it is better to remove them by untying.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or a warm potion and evil humors are cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by that it is alleviated, the entrance to a little of things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument where one gathers the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to moderate the heat
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut without great necessity that it has;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for making an incision:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut deeply into the curve and do not deviate, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	see you in a power, for this is worth muscles.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part beneath the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if you put the head and the foot higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is on one of the injured parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you find that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to manage what I say in large and minor wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	In small wounds, use what you have prepared.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then you hold between your hands, I minister pitifully who draws out all the treatment with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it is the common manner of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then let the top of the wound heal, I do not hasten it, and I fix a needle or there is a strong thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with the skin of the hip, with the skin of the sphac,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join the head of the hip to the assembly of the sphac;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then hold back with a double thread inside the needle of the finger,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble the heads of the wound quickly,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let it be in a space, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the double thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease from doing so according to what you have learned about the needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the whole wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary for them to be moistened;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so they do not accumulate and open the wound before the scab;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and you hold taut threads on the head of the needles to keep them steady
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this way of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it suffices to insert a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second cauterization is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you gather the two heads of skin and the two heads of flesh together at a single point, where there is a strong middle thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these heads all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each vertebra, the size of a lesser finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this vertebra belongs to the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I found a wound that one of our men had in the belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was injured by a dagger,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was a wound more than a palm long
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was well of the intestines, nearly two palms of length
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was a wound in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine then, when it had been without food for 23 hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and was the wound sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal with ointment, for I stood in a place where one found none, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put on it a cotton dressing often twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Here is the translation:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to the point within.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have placed the head of the siphaeus or costal or where you have pricked with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce another part of the defective area within just up to the point.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew thus as the pelleteer makes the pelts,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and you let one side of the bandage be loose, and take it up on the other, until the entire dressing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of dressing, which Galen described properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	it is so like a fountain, which naturally assembles the broken parts together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one head of the bandage to the other head, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or a pointed instrument close by, and make it pierce the skin slightly.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the juices of the blood flow out;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and make it pierce the part that is defective just up to the inner cavity,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the juices of the blood flow out;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make a perforation on one side and the other of the weakened part just up to the inner edge, in another head of the Miraculum which are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says this in his book, and no one bears witness to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one should stitch the belly with many needles, or there is a thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should thrust an needle from one part, and another from elsewhere, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is a wound more grievous than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the artery has moved.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the powder soothing charcoal,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the artery has moved, so put no ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and sew up the sutures, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, a lot of cotton,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and change it many times a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not have mastery of other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the main limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperament warm, or in oil rose,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or prickling in the belly, and many times it happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they apply a cluster of black wine, and meanwhile the porridge reaches up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it penetrates deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to its natural passages.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the suture jumps from the wound, reset it back as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turned towards white or black, it is necessary that you lift the black spot, which is a sign of bad blood that comes from it,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the indices of the heads pendant during the part below the wound until it is far enough to alleviate the extraction when the nerves are quiet, and the wound is relaxed.
de la routure dou boueil	from the twisting of the gut
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is swollen, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore it in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and there ensued the evacuation and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to subtily treat until it was healthy, and the wounds soothed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sweat, I doubted that the patient had a pain in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take firm stitches with large threads, then assemble the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the patient has opened their mouth, if they place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if they strain their mouth thus;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then they grasp the head, and it holds thus so that it cannot dislocate,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then place another finger afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut open the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head settles into the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can bind the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this gut thread that is very much disentangled,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then attach it to the head of this thread, namely a subtle twisted flaxen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its natural position;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of suturing wounds is not otherwise than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, similarly when it is in one of the intestinal gut, if there is no ingenious remedy, because of subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is swollen and burst open.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of hard and white, where one does not feel pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it appears clear and thin, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healthy, and there is no flesh.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not except by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, through the small passage of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or through its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	where for this he has hard crust within, and on the lips, which does not let him have crust;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where he has too much of a bump;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	for it is that the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	for in the property where the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and inflamed by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula, which is done by surgical operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	to the spine of the back, or to some joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it reaches the property of the principal member, and similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if it has any fistula that does not move near the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you examine the view, if you take a rod of iron or steel, so the fistula is straight, if it is ready.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, if it seeks a subtle probe of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the probes fold back within the twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search well by probing,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if one catheterizes through one of the passages,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows from one passage to another, and it is clarified;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you seek to know by your power if there is a bone or nerve, and it is shaved in the background,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you will truly know the limb or where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in one of the limbs that I have told you, if the cope follows what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bone for the fracture and the rotten flesh that is within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment as long as it is healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well formed in the right place, it is necessary that you cut in a perpendicular direction, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I put moist applications in medicine agua, and the joints just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the excess flesh which is accumulated at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments in the wounds, clear and healthy flesh, so that it be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if he is not healthy through this, then he should be cauterized as we have said
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he should be treated.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is not grieved or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then you should remove it so that the corruption is completely removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment of things straying so much that they are healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and renders void as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not led just to the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it discovers and seeks as much as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and stop all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, it's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deeply rooted, so you cannot come to an end;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction instrument is suitable for that,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, so remove them completely, do not leave a single one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you burn with fire and moisture, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place on the wound something that promotes suppuration.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the pus is formed between the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have less difficulty with the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, such as of leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you remove only the corrupted part so that the blackness is completely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of corrupted flesh, and it reaches close to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to burn and cut all the way to the corruption, and then to treat until it be healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that befell a certain man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you take an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about thirty years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and had no way to evacuate for opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctor, in their foolishness, operated so much that they opened up to the abscesses,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and in corrupting many materials, and it became a fistula, and they came to have many holes that all the filth and moisture of the body flowed;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many doctors made a cure within two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was afflicted, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which corrodes through the perforations to a large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body became red from youthful strength, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I touched a tent in one of these perforations, and then felt all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one vein comes against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut into one of the openings as far as I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I seized upon that which appeared to me as the corrupted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and thus begins to restore the wound with medicines soaked in long tension, and cannot be sewn;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then he begins again, and uncovers the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then stopped it, and thought of sewing up the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do so much that I cut into one palm of the bone, and thrust it forth with all its marrow;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then the restoration of medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved suddenly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and did not need to start the work again for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For often blood was evacuated, but he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and it grew on the bone of the shoulder a hard callus, and was of good disposition and had no harm nor opposition in every way, neither to alleviate nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take the bandage, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command that it be stretched high above;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another bandage on top of the first one, larger than the first bond, and bind it to the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and hold the head steady, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from beneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not bruise the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a probe or a tubular instrument beneath the bone to remove the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to cauterize as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to cauterize again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear so, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if the whole skin is discolored; then put a hot iron underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then one should cauterize from one part to the other the corruption, and let the cautery be done according to the length of the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or it contains on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of the joints, then there is no other anguish except to cut through;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the finger of the foot, then it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but however it is necessary that you inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and you should anoint it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause opposition;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and the sockets for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the joints,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similarity of work with its instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that you will show the instrument with which you have mastered, according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and testify about the ways of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you propose the instrument with which you have mastered, according to what it suits him.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head perishes either due to density or due to excess.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have applied the medicine to that corrosion through the treatment of remedies, and they do not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes by means of death, or through evil, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it goes to those corroding of limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes over the whole body; if you hasten to cope with it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and this is through the impact of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Here is the translation:
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, if the cope reaches the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, if the cope reaches the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it does not deserve any remedies except the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and all thus done when the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes to the first joint, then the cope reaches beyond another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then amputate the whole foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it reaches the leg, then amputate at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to amputate or sever the limb is that you tie it above and below;
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister's hand downwards, and another minister's hand upwards,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious latitude, so that the bone becomes uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cover or sew, and put a layer of linen on each part, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy skin,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient another wound and abscess to heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the blood flow decreases when you operate, then cauterize the limb hastily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then wrap the numb limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that it happened to a certain man in our city:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a blackness that seemed to come from fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion came first in his finger toe, so much that it consumed the entire toe;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the toe, and was cured;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the corruption returned in his hand finger, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put them on things rebounding after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the ulcers;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it seems that I passed the hand, and I did not want, that I had hope of rebounding the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was feeble; and he despaired all, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and hold fast his hand, and he will be healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not found it stated elsewhere that because of this, one does something else, if one has mastery.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an abscess come to a clear skin, and it stays for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they break and burst, and the pus jumps out, and the veins become empty, just like a drained vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin which is above is also as subtle as the delicate sheets.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and does not reach just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the doctor is required to cut around the entire wound, and similarly when it is subtle, just like one wraps.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not hesitate because of its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you find that the wounds are getting worse, and the decay is not on the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the wound is full of flesh, so the treatment with a cluster follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Here is the translation:
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then the rectifier of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take arsenic, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put copper in a vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and make it into a liquid and into honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and clean the wound, and hold the peritons;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine sit for three hours, then strain it by pressing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wounds are cicatrized, and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time should be cleaned with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, it is that you take ashes of wood from vine, and throw water above.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then boil, and clarify, until you know that the blood is well purged;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot suffer it, nor the Egyptian medicine with water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if you clarify with water and honey or it has a little bit of littarge powder;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of mundifying and cleaning,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you apply a mixture of what creates birth to flesh in it,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in the treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the passage of the sinus is small, and the canal of theclyster cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it with a iron instrument a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	where application of basilicon, so that it be enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, thus prick and let it suppurate as much as it can, or the cluster may enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the perforation that makes a hole is above, thus cover or make a lower level than it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the hole is in the fontanelle, thus do not let it become inflamed there;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat below thus as you want,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if it appears in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bowel is perforated, if you do not allow it to become inflamed there
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat below thus as you want,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	if it appears in this manner: that the bowel moves gently downwards, and does not leave anything behind from the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and apply a dressing of linen that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then cover the affected area of the breast, i.e. a small area larger than at first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then is the gentle adjustment of the bandage according to the quantity of the pierced hole.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the pierced hole of the breast to align the fracture, and do not remove the large bandage until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the pierced hole of the breast, removes it frequently to reset the fracture,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know that which runs from the fracture, whether it is venom or poison or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when the medicine has extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender part of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts are affected already, and approach the healthy ones;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you dislocate the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If you change the other dressing, and renew the binding.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses are disturbed by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle veins come to the surface after long tension, do not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health approaches. For there are men who delay in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel is indigestible, it knows how to release itself after many days, it seems that the breasts do not become accustomed;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are painful, if you apply moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as we have said definitively, because it has a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take ointment definitively, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then he must be cooked and used; and this same mixture makes honey-cooked groats.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when we apply it, it is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then glue it to the dressing, and apply it to the wound, and many times I have ministered to a logger's long wound,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the sky, which is as if flour of times and hundred.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or at the foot, or which happens to grow on other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess forms here,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and pour pus as far as it runs to the root of the finger, and by chance they corrupt everything;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come ulcers up to the bone, as far as it comes to foul-smelling pain, and the head of the finger is swollen, and the color is dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not profit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	Here is the translation:
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses on the flesh inside, and it starts to point, and becomes white,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must put something under the nail that points at the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and put the bottle up high, and hold this subtle and light character.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply to the remaining flesh of the wound medicines that are burning and corrosive to cauterize everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wounds thoroughly so that they heal.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it, and pull out strongly, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the finger decay, so cut it off at the joint as we said before that it is like that.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal it until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, so it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut off the finger at the joint of the hand, cutting across the upper part;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the incision does not reach just to the skin which is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it to calm it down.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a fingernail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them grow from the root of the joint, or the birth is in no way from our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	That which grows on no nut of the toe does not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and that which grows at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one who is fleshed is light, in such manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers together.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who are born with their fingers or toes bent inward, it is necessary that you first straighten the rounded flesh up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then feel the bone to a suitable socket, then heal it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden movements that come together suddenly come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it happens that you feel that dislocation, then the duty is to repair it according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or wrapped in a millstone oil rosset, so they do not dislocate;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	where you put between two subtle pieces of plank, so that the eyes are suspended, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	they suddenly come together with the palm, if they cope with that suspension as it is necessary.
Des vils	Of veins
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are large, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors, which come into the limbs of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and there is more in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they cut, and treat on fire the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein, and treat it all on fire.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done in this manner: first raise the leg to a warm and very hot temperature, so that the thick blood is subtitled.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip, just to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then release and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's vein can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the ligature, and he instructs that he abstains from eating meat cooked with black coal;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommend evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of the limb are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no balms, heat it with fire, and then apply the cup at the vein of the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part beneath the armpit;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems also like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then push the vein beneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then place it lightly at the ankle;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then burn with fire in another place, thus two wounds; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then apply the ointment to the wound, just as you have done, and attach it to another ulcer, just as you had done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then burn with another cauterization, or more if you are a master of it, then apply the ointment, and burn on the toe of the foot;
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then remove and apply the ointment up to the second cauterization; then extract the cauterization from cauterization, until it is completely removed, then burn;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull it back and lift it, if you prick with a strong double-threaded needle at all points.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and pull and tug, and prick below with a strong thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is settled;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and take care that it does not seize up, for if it seizes up, you cannot pull or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have fully pulled it back, place on the wound a lint soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if his vision is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	it is necessary that you bend it gently, but do not touch it; and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron instrument with which one touches the vision is curved, and does not cut, so it does not touch the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, in warm regions where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in soil where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it grows in another part rather than the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very large inflammation comes into the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then it changes the veins, and begins to swell outward, like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth seven and a half inches up to the elbow, and the nail,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth on the leg, and all the times it is not in default, if you envelop it with the cloth, and the nail;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut part of it off, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is all removed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is not at all times this vein when it is treated with five fingers' length, or ten inches;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and a hand came to me, whose fingers were ten inches long, and when you take its measure, if it bursts into four or five, and pierces just to the ends,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes from many perforations, and there are many ulcers; heal them thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From wounds that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small vein that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body, rising and falling,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it feels like a good flow from member to member, as much as it descends into the skin or it goes, and jumps forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is a sign of bad digestion of certain humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it curving and straying, if one cannot be steadfast that when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	it is necessary then that you read the place above and below with a strong and well-straightened lien,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the straying vein, and if the verse is deeply implanted in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire, until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that he does, is that he corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or approaching near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then cope with it above, and remove it completely;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient's moderation of corpus of soluble medicines for the evil humidors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of rotten flesh eating away at the putridity.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes into some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then it moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it grow as big as a vein on the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more painful than anything, just like living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little afterwards it corrupts throughout the whole body, so much that it comes into the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it seems to me that it turns again inward towards the body, as I see it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised at how it moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not avoid what he wants, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this, the constricted womb appears;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I do not appear to be in accordance with this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the lie is above and below hastily, and then cope with it until that windiness constrains the issue in its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure for those who expel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's wisdom, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some which have large heads, and small ones, and notched, and rounded;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have jagged edges, and those which have lengths, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which falls on any member if it falls according to several manners: whether in a principal member it injures,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	if like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then on any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many guises;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the symptom of the brain when the arrow is in the head and pierces the bone, and exits the forehead which is above the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there is Scotomy and numbness and reversal and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perplexity of understanding, and evacuations of the colon;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and it jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pimple, and it jumps out also as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow so it does not remain inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not at all loose.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a pimple, and in a dark bloody flux, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Here is the translation:
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that did not penetrate deeply into the arm is that without pus or swelling from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient's color changes, and he sighs deeply and casts a high fever.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow head breaks into the covering of the bladder, it is beneath the small ribs; and it casts great anguish and great pain and sighs; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow head breaks in the stomach, by chance it comes out of the wound with some undigested food.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow head breaks in the belly, and it comes out at a point of feces through the intestine, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the blood vessel breaks in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the blood vessel is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because I did something similar.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man whose blood vessel burst or broke in the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touched it, and pulled from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without feeling numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pulled out an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was put back, and could not be felt except for the tip towards the hollow,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was a large arrow of a Turkish bow, with an iron tip without any edge; the game was without harm, and no bad accidents happened to me.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And pull out a arrowhead from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrowhead at the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I seized the barbs, and subtly pulled as much as I could, and the Christian was saved.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrowhead from a man's body, which had fallen into his belly, and I thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then when it had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and I engineered it, and I made the trajectory straight, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow fell or stuck, and the wound is swollen above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and delay extracting the arrow from him, and do not disturb his natural disposition,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you saw another man who had an arrow wound on his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he lingered thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And they extracted an arrow from the king's prince's man, which was stuck in his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the treatment after she had fallen, three days prior. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched her everywhere with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt a throbbing pain beneath her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the injured place a digestive attractive plaster, because the wounds do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I appear to have healed the wound of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster daily, and restored the wounded place, and thus I held back the patient's long-term pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow, that is, a day within his nose; and it did not bother him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a medicinal corroding medicine by gentle hours, until it was uncovered,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had become stuck in the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it went well beyond the terms for three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then examine if the wound is where I touched the tendons, and the muscle of one part and another, and cannot issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to subtly feel and ingeniously examine the instruments, until I grasped it, that is, the well-made tendons.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may draw it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare well a great many things, and on what is present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find new work, and a new instrument, at the understanding of the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except in seven manners.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the skin where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and jumps forth at no time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if she does not jump now, let her wait until the flesh is porous within, and may the dislocation be alleviated.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if she is fixed in the bone, and she cannot exit, let her wait thus for some days, and move a little each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, prick within at all .i. subtle forest, as much as the eyes within are enlarged, and then pull.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: if it does not trouble him, let it be until it is even afterwards for some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrowhead comes just to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrowhead does not get fixed further than in the bone, and does not come just to the surface,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains some days without a bad accident, if the engine of the wound is treated.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck in this way and cannot come out, if you apply tareres around, as I have told you; then heal the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, then seek it out with the entire tendon.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the abscess is great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the flesh is torn which is deeply fixed with two fingers by the muscle where you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can draw it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly understand that you do not break the arrow, that you extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, if you leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood counteracts you, if you diminish what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision into the nerve and vein, and make an effort so that you can extract the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	where you touch or press, or hold firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell on them,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is inflamed in a place if one sees or feels it outwardly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	cut then upwards, as much as the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommences the extraction until it comes forth;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a remainder of the arrowhead, cut around the entire shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the shaft breaks, and you want to administer a remedy, then it administers an instrument that cuts.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is hairy, he applies it to the instrument with a point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it converges.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is near the surface, and you can touch it, then you can cover over it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the blood.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the swelling vein is also like the feather of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to swell at the point of the blood, as if it were the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tendons to swell and to dry out, thus it is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because there it has or at the head 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: 2 veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins;
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the 2 arteries which are in the 2 temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and those veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose-bridge;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the gums which are around the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are two in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the common people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basiliac,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the artery is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the abdomen,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one that is bled, which appears clearly on the skin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and on the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is below the curve of the hollow of the left shin.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right shin; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The knowledge of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and scrub the area where the veins are of a rough fabric; then the patient should restrain his neck to a single gaze,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	so that the veins appear behind the ears in the dependent areas of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the hammers strike your finger, and where you feel the pulsation beneath your finger, it is a sign of an abscess;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and thrust it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein above,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and peel back the skin well, you must give two drops of traversing, and make issue two bloods as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold it steady and raise it, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the arteries that are in the temples, if it is worth migrating to an old vein,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and swollen, and accustomed to opthalmia, and at the root of the watery eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the wound if it is thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse beneath your finger, and then signs of the fracture;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then apply the cauterizing iron to the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and apply the vein above, and the cope, as you have done with other veins, and make correction of the blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then undo the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their coping and extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The illness of the forehead vein, which is just as valuable as the illness of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the illnesses constrict their neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release to the patient the neck, and lay the vein so it is healthy and never swells from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Here is the translation:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the vein be of equal traverse, a little thick, a little long, a little wide, for there is no cartilage.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The vein of the arm that is worth aagu, and to strong force, and to evil diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	As if migraine and redness come to the face, and especially when it is chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a subtle flame long, and hold it in the hollow of the eyebrow in the space that is between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now start to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too much in depth, and make a correction of the blood according to the necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the .ij. joints helps with the straightening of the arm, and at the beginning of messelry, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corroding, and herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the health is that the patients stretch their neck from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the masters stand above the patient's head, and the patients sit on a stool.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then prick the vein of the arm slightly larger, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the veins moderately,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver helps with pain in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks in the liver, and painful nose and entrails.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right liver and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they are recognized by this, that they are black, and by this, around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you examine the largest of each part, and all thus make the veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the healthy area below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Here is the translation:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and he raises his tongue, and looks from below on each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	feel both the one and the other, and do not press too much in depth, for there are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck where one commonly feels are sensed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or when pricking everywhere, a large flame appears, or a subtle olive-green color if one cuts deeply, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is useful for opening the veins that are full of gross blood apparent, and that contain gross blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the healer to heal carefully, and that he beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not be pricking the phlegm, but rather trimming it like a nail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the ulcer does not open manifestly, then you must extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no rupture of it, or you heal the vein in his arm: it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and trim the phlegm like a nail, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to examine the level of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the level as much as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the level of the notch, and then stretch out the arm, and cover the vein of the flame with anise;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the level swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Here is the translation:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not cleansed, and it grows worse, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut open the artery so that it reveals the head of the veins; and cleanse the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scraping of fistula, and make it, and take one of the embers and lay them well just next to the other journey;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound is cleansed, it's good; if not, then cure, as we have said, with powders that cleanse blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the cleansing remedies are not grievous in many dispositions for the small wound of the plague, and the possession of the doctrine of the arm's power.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein's wisdom is a thousand times better if it draws blood from above the head and below the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the vein to be warmed by the nerve that is below, and if it does not penetrate deeply enough, and it finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it becomes inflamed and the health is grievously affected, and by chance it cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and it is necessary to open the nerve many times, and if it does not open in any men because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you loosen the sinew of the instrument with ease; and avoid loosening the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then it should be made to flow gently.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The sinew of the cephalic aids, which attracts blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to cauterize at the flame of olive oil or at the flame of mirtyne, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Here is the translation:
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when it fails at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not achieved unless it preserves health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and it is the healthy vein made in one of the three veins that are or touched: that is to say, cephalic, fasting, and basilica;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 3 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no determined hour, but only when need is felt by day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor is it advisable to cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is advisable that they evacuate the intestines with a light clyster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if it has much bad humors retained, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not become healthy who is too full of food, nor who is drunk, as long as he is furious, nor dropsical;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and becomes worse on the part of the sick one after colic passion, and vomiting, and discomfort of the stomach, and multiplication of habits in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and all that is contrary to virtue, or by means of the arm or of the whole body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtle are the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and through drinks and through medicines, if you have them in great abundance;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then between or bath, it is not a thing that does not weaken, to subtily thin out the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you close the vein of the foot below the thigh, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you beware that day of operation, and of point, and of slipped disc, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be gentle and joyful, and let the veins be higher than the one that is being treated, and rub the arm three or four times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then he rubs the joint with his hands until the veins swell, and he feels them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then he anoints the surgeons with a little oil of a small flask, then places his finger of his left hand under that vein below the joint where he wants to operate,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as if they were cords to the surgeon, and if there are those that are full of windiness,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if one touches the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or in haste, if the vein is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vein is swollen, and the patient is in spasm, let it be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Here is the translation:
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the bleeding is subtle and you doubt whether it has not bled as much as you see, then thrust the same perforation fully into the flame directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and hold it a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eyes inflamed, do not recommence the bleeding, and put a little of the oil of the lily on it, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is modified in this eye with the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the lily oil in each wound that you bleed, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same method makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one puts it on the place; if the blood is subtle and separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there come big abscesses, which occur many times, especially when it is not healthy enough except at that time when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten, and put on the place a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has issued from the vein, and if it remains on the place for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put among none of those things of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, masterly, or similarly.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is abscess and appearance at the healthy part of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of those things that we have said, for by chance in court without the artery; but it makes .i. a plaster secure to harden the spot, then cure with another cure, until it be healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And extract each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because the patient's blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see a large tumor, let it diminish until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him less often and more slowly, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bleeding is free from corruption of blood and gathering of nerves, and it is better than the long bleeding which is not large.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a gentle poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is heated, then draw out three or four times the blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold complexion, then apply a gentle poultice made from muscat syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it swells at the health, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he has a broth of beef, and subtle sweet-smelling syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to anoint his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is affected by great wound, that he anoints little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to anoint his arm after the first healing, and it has strong flesh, if he anoints seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to heal from another part, if he should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has much blood within the body which is already heated, and it causes fever to come; if one wants to treat a great quantity, and widen the pores as much as possible, so that it may issue forth in perspiration.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you consider all the conditions of health, and put your hand on their pulse when they are healthy, so death does not come into their body.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healer is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not matter when you want to dislocate the arm, and make blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, that he stretches the arm hastily, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be until it heals the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein issues forth,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on a small amount of oil in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it too much, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed twice, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein near the hand because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healthy one is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so long as the vein becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then should it be bound moderately, so that the vein appears good, then the healthy part now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the perforations be wide, and be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put your hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not reinsert your hand into cold water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger of the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	hold the hand, and put it in cold water, until the vein becomes swollen, if one sees it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is crossed, and if you cut it entirely, do not hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are situated very close to the skin,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put your hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The wisdom of the sage is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as well as diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his wisdom is that the patient's pain is alleviated by placing a warm poultice on the vein, and rubbing it gently until it perspires.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and applying it beneath the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many kidneys are affected.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cauterize the patient on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein that traverses also like a coping; and let the flames be anointed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot issue out, put the foot in water, and let the vein be well cleaned.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the veins fail at first, start again a second time from underneath a little, because the blood is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a similar vein from the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic leg is at the junction of the thigh, and its health depends on the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its health is that patients get better or worsen, and stretch above the thigh three fingers in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then the health appears in all the ways that you can, and by crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is good that you take care of it, for the vein is healthy, and it is much restored to many people at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, a healthy vein appears or gives in the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let the blood flow as you see fit, and then release the ligature, and put on cotton and bind; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The healthiness of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation which is without touching if it is according to two manners: either it is at all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation which is done by touching and by blood extraction if it is done in 13 places of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	where one is entirely in the back of the head; and the other is within the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the ventous below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping on the shoulders; and the cupping on the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the cuppings in the shoulders arms; and the cuppings of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cuppings of the ribs; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this, one should not be afraid to take it, as one does when collecting blood from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not suitable that it be administered, nor at all by fire or sensation of fire, in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is suitable to administer, or due to habit, if we begin to give it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they have a task of administering, have a heavy hand;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who dread, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to take a purge after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose helps with the grief of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation is in the place of the sanity of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not suit anyone who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a catarrh, because that causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it does not suit those who are old in use, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often get dizzy, become oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping device a little lower down due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The ventilation in the hollow of the neck is at the level of the healthy head and the basilic vein, and therefore it has value for the shortening of the thigh.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in fracture of the channel of the forearm, and in swelling, and in replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to puncture little, for if it holds too firmly, then it causes obstruction or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventilations at the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obstructions and migraines, and in the constriction, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the hand of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to apply their hand to put it in place, so they do not touch the artery, and do not cause any effusion of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The breaths from beneath the chin are worth a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the hands of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The breaths from the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and from fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The breaths from the thighs are worth as much as those of the two veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions, because the flesh is naked of skin, and it knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping which is on the backside is useful for removing deep-seated humor, and for illnesses beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of copper, so it has mastery to draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings of the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are useful for ancient pains in the loins, and in the marrow, and in the bladder, and reset the fluxes; and are in place of .ij. sophenes, and .ij. chevilles, and altogether they refresh the body after long use, and make come paumison in more dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck immediately, and put it hastily, and remove evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the red and swollen place, and appear the roughness of the blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed in the disposition of the bodies, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once softly, and necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtly open up the passage of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we suffice with striking only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to remove a lot of blood, it is necessary to start again; and if the blood is thick, then we should strike deeply, and the terminus is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is suitable for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have stiff pores, that you anoint the hairs of the abscesses with opening and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this way, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of bitter wood, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if one has a tender and large pores skin, it does not need to apply oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it needs to be washed after the irrigation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar others.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he rises from axle, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have gross excesses rise from old wine, or water of elder, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping device before bathing, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping treatment.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of the patient who is choleric, and whose blood is too agitated and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and apply poultices, and flesh of swallows, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and applies poultices little by little, and applies small poultices and small birds' meat;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he feels better, if he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before the ventilation, or after, to comfort the principal members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the skin be subtle, but it is not suitable except for those who are hot in the body.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping glasses that are placed without piercing are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, because these members cannot suffer from piercing on their skin.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not perform it more than to attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place them on the breasts when the veins are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the bowels to thin out the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue through adventure the operation, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it is done when one puts it on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these windy places are emptied by sucking so strongly; and never are they treated together with fire, and never are they filled with stagnant water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in evil diseases of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the windy place with warm stagnant water, or with water where it has cooked conovolent herbs for that purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth from the front, and it has or forms around the middle a small hole, just as if to put in an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it is of iron, soft in front so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and it has in the middle a crosswise iron or iron rod, for placing a candle's flame,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they are big and small according to the diseases and the age of those who contract them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then put this veinous humour on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or lead, and put it in the veinous humour across the rod which is in the veinous humour,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Let the brightness be at the bottom of the cupping device so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the orifice that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapor goes out, and remove the cupping device.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the limb as before, and frequently repeat it, if you are a master.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping device, which is administered in disease of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is no vein or orifice, and it is not administered unless when it is full of blood, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible.
et c’est li forme:	and it's the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Veins are not amenable to treatment unless in members where one cannot put compresses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the usage is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet nerves without obstruction, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a soft bandage on them, so they become familiar with it, and have no wind in their belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the ulcers;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full, and they will make a crust, see if it is the place where one can put a cupping, then put it, for it is very valuable afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place of the axle, and then of the water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and you must wash it thoroughly afterwards with the course of the sound veins, if it is muddy; I will drizzle on a cold water, and put it in place, so that the vein is stretched.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is multiplied, then put on a crushed vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, so that it may be stretched.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the limb a poultice of peas shells, and let them stay until they adhere to the limb, it will staunch now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more material at hand, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the sinews do not take well, rub the limb with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sinew goes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them in place, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they cling, sprinkle a little of aloe and of crushed silk, or of ash, so that they will adhere now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish wise man departs from this chapter, for they never found anything in the ancient books, nor did they read a letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the science is strange in our land, for I never found any good in it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters beforehand.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and stays on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twist or bruise comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so that nothing is lacking to you entirely, just as weakness of body, or infants, or old men.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or the tension is not too tight, or too cold; and beware of cold joints, it is to know cold joints, and flesh of birds and of goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat rough coarse foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, so that you have no doubt of hot abscess, nor of spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government that they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that make big nourishment, where they have viscosity, just as one would cook in water, and rice, and bread, and pieces of meat, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment is represented by milk and more quickly heals the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that old and decrepit broken bones cannot be well restored or reunited according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, just like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But in no way is it cured, reset on the broken bone .i. large tendons that are strained and join the limb together, so that it is strengthened as it was before; and not at all point of its working, and for this reason one must nourish it with thick foods, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, just like the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a complete small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known, the fracture of the bone because the joints are twisted, and open well by default, and sound when pressed by hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move the hand, but put on medicines that come hereafter, and then hold steady now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which goes in the hollow, and are the disjointed parts, they must now be set in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not grow there;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses grow there, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it in equal measure that you can lift gently and knowingly, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it suits afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is dislocated from its place, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with strings, or with a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are rejoined, you reset them by adjusting them to their proper places with your fingers, and be careful not to cause the patient injury or pain;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the broken heads of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if you straighten it properly, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to their work through their bad practice cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at rest, thoroughly instruct the patient that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure well that the limb is so positioned that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and one must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set straight, so that twists do not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, thus arms and fingers and similar: if it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wraps.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, thus hips and legs: if it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire large limb, and restrain all parts equally, so that there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the entire limb is lightly touched, 3 or 4 times, according to the member, and hold your hand a little above the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture then disengages a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the limb a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another limb, and turn again above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lesson above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the lightly touched limbs of linen or cloth, so that it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something calming to the inflamed area, which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold it steady with strips of a wide ribbon, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm branches, and arrange them according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the strip one places on the fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold steady on the studs as you did at the first treatment, then put a thread underneath, just as on the breakage at the first treatment.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The tighter it is underneath, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are large, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it's a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there is less than two fingers' width between each stud.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the studs of the staples after the tightening on their sound skin, then put beneath them swabs of flax or some other dressing, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And beware that it is not necessary to strain these broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is large, it is not necessary to put these dressings on before five or six days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that suddenly occurs.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore breakage, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is kept as near the miller's wall, and mix it with a lot of egg whites, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common manner of plaster to restore breakage in many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to apply it that is worth twisting: take mugwort and violets, in the amount of ten; mix and grind, in the amount of eight; add a little water; boil Armenian bole in the amount of ten; and pound well, and combine with water or abundant egg whites, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to apply it to joints and ease the dislocation of their places, and alleviate sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the breakage: take new flax, and grind it in a mill and in cooked oil, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore at all, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly relieving pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to apply a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earth-bound peony leaves, and pound them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to apply a plaster for the restoration of bone breakage and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, violet flowers, fern powder, each part; and pound, and combine with wine, and if the member is hot, combine with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seed of flax, baluster, mellilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomile, all in one part; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb anything more than cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on a broken limb, for restoration, warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and leaves of decocted omes, or feathers of a bird, and vismalve, and let it simmer, and pound, and make an ointment and put it on the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then you dislocate it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not dislocate it by hand for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten it, and dislocate it, and remove the splint now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater, moistened, and dip into water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on a dry linen cloth, softened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little splinting, and do not strain it so much as before; and treat subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are here entirely, and you have mastery of applying and binding, then recommend it, as you had done the first equal treatment.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb from what we have said, do not delay further than three days or four days or five days or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then retain it more than at first, and the swelling absorbs its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drying out more than mastery is not, know that nourishments cannot come to it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Apply the warm water treatment then, every time you lay it down, and that is each third day, and ease a little the ligature.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Here is the translation:
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are fractures made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck of bone is broken just above the socket which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and therefore this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts the bone from above with a downward blow, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or cut of stone, or fall on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is located in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by falling on stone, or by a blow, or by similar things, and it makes the piece of bone enter below, and it is like the joints are dislocated as when the joiners set them in place; so between the bones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have humid or moist heads, like children's heads.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged, as if they were brittle; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks through the detection above them, and the inquiry into their tension, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hairline is known by this: when one discovers the bone, and one rubs above it, then it reveals the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, beware of accidents befalling the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and bruising, and feverishness, and eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, if he cannot recover without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the numbness comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the vein before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the vein before the seventh day, lest the tendon beneath the vein become corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief nerve of the afflicted head, and uncover it on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the discharge of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess falls, it is aided by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with medicated plaisters soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And make the wound rest until the abscess falls and is pacified, and be assured of the discharge of blood; then begin to cut into the bone with an osteotome, and it is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut at the tightest point beforehand, and this is the method:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you make another incision, a larger one than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various instruments, some are narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and are of iron indeed; and work lightly, so you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce around, thus that you do not ministrations with instruments, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the tender test, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place in the thickness of the bone, thus that you have instruments for every tender test; and this is the form of the three kinds of instruments:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing into the broken bone is that you put an instrument on the bone, and turn it with your two hands so that you know the bone is pierced; then you remove the instrument to another part a little afterwards, and thus do everywhere, then cut around the incision in the space of the bone which is between the pertusions, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you hold as if with pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn it out, it is necessary that you take the instrument that is hidden in the bone to another entire instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and more subtle than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no nails, if they lightly touch the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is that which Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears obvious, so that when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this lance-like incision, from which it is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you carefully cut around the entire bone, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is burned by fire, let the bone be lightly touched, for one touches well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered only slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to take off the scales with a subtle rasp, which you should have in different quantities, to prepare each place as most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily responded to by one who has put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soften it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and soften it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first dressing; and make it as light as possible, so you do not aggravate the wound, then apply from above another lien, and do not constrict it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be so for a day or two, until the hot abscesses are appeased, then disband them, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of violets, and incense powder, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and apply again medicines without harshness or biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and beware that the wound is not too clean, so you do not leave it to suppurate, nor allow it to gather together, for when it gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and causes the patient great malice; for when one places something biting on the wound, it becomes inflamed from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no better results come from the medicine that one has put on, which has some virtue, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and dissolve in four drops, and apply it to the skin.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal by various methods of treatments that are suitable, so that he may be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that often the three parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the socket, because they are three bones; and that beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary to put your little finger or pertus of the nail, and match the break equally with your index finger, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be reduced to its place, then it is necessary that you set it straight at the head of a radius slightly large.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, you will make another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then it will begin to form a head of new skin, and the fracture will be in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply it elsewhere, the break is there; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that one should soften the tendons in burr, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites and powder of mill; then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes apply egg whites on the nose instead of tendons, and if it is a swollen drapil around, and hold the break, and soothe the patient within; or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerotate or cotton moistened with oil of roses, or in a poultice of dyaculum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if apostemes come, apply an emplaster made with flour of sixament, and powder of incense, mixed with album of egg, then place light poultices, and do not bind where the node is.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break of the node is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the estrumens suitable for that, then sew up the fissure, and treat the things which are causing harm in this way, and suddenly, just as emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no node with a naked wound, then treat with tentes, and I place cannes of lead, until it be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken beneath, and there is no sign of a wound above, and the break is beneath so subtly, and it is not broken in two, unless the cartilage within, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently feel the break within, and hold it firm with the other hand above, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated in two, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth have movement, or are broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a well-made steel, or a piece of even, long and wide leather according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then put it back in place as it is changing; and apply a poultice made from mill powder with plenty of egg white or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healed in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or wounds come, treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, remove a small piece of bone that has been broken off; if you subtly extract the broken-off pieces with suitable instruments for that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, open it with a flame according to the need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it becomes healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in two manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to stretch it further, put a round sphere of cloth or leather under the patient's shoulder, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the force with your hand, so that you set the break evenly, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot bring the head of the force into alignment, because it comes in the wrong way, then it is necessary that the patient leans back onto their seat, and put under the shoulder a small cushion, and push the ministers below the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the force is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the break with your fingers, and if you feel debris, then it is necessary that you probe within; and pull out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then take one of the instruments you have; but put under the force this instrument, to ward off the syphac.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it seems a spoon, and it is not a chisel, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the possibility of the wound; and have .ij. pieces, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, according to the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder from soft millet and egg white, and put light bandages on, and put a splint underneath, if you have mastery of it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very large bandage of a palm's breadth in length, then put a double layer of dressing on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a subtle strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains pendant;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the steel on the broken bone, and turn the bandage around the neck, and above the healthy spine, and above the diseased spine; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break firmly, and you clearly see that the steel does not move on the broken bone, if you reward it each day, and when the tendons are relaxed, if it is restrained;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less than any other treatments.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and you do not know how to set it right except by touch; if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millet with abundant egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not aligned with any part of the shoulder, use the strap made of linen threads, so that the strap is evenly aligned; and then hold it firmly in place with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the joint every day; and all the times it becomes inflamed, adjust it, and put the strap in its proper place, and ease the patient's side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be assured, for it is not a case that can be set right lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not below the heart, if it breaks, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscessous heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thigh is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and numbness, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels well afterwards.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplausters and stoups above the subtle layer of salt, or another light dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it to the broken bone, so it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it is reset, then hold it; and if it wishes to dislocate again, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the flesh, or pain or abscess, if you hasten, and loosen the emplauster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then reset the emplauster, and hold it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It knows that the breaking of the ribs does not come from elsewhere but from the large ones behind the back, and inside the head, and do not feel otherwise because they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry in both.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the remedies are that you put equal to the breaking, as it is necessary. And then put the plaster, and hold it with a stick, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inside, the patient feels very great pain and puncture, just as if from a piercing, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits greatly, spewing out blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the stomach, in order to soften the rupture at the weak point.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, because hot abscesses will not come, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, then bleed them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that some of those who put cups on the skin, to suck out the matter, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping does not attract the excess humors from the skin due to the weakness of the disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of the veins that one must cover the limb with a warm oil cloth, and place tents between the ribs to make the treatment equal on both sides, then it will be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the swelling that touches the cloth, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open up the broken rib area, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to support the wound; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters, until they are healthy. And if abscesses come, then place warm roset oil cloths, and apply them to the area; and treat while the area that needs an abscess is being treated, and apply gentle pressure on the ribs where it is needed, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck bone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will become dislocated; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of their hands being softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel it. Be aware that it is mortally in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them firmly and steadily, be aware that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so apply a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated on their belly, it is an involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated on their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Be aware that it is mortally: do not labor in vain for their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of Mayeu, as much as it soothes; then apply a comforting and drying plaster, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover on the heart of the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, at a costure, then the treatment of ointment in January, until it be healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kowe", if you put your pouchet in your left hand, and put it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the emplaustre and the stake on, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make a fomentation, and remove, and treat the wound until it be healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the hip is broken, and if it breaks, then there will not be a little bit of comfort at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the paralyzed parts, and comes to the patient's pain in the back, and piercing, and inflames what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, so that you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is solely at the head, then put equally this fracture, so that it be in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be facilitated.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on a plaster, then place it on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the bandage beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the aposteme (abscess) breaks out, do not touch it, so that the aposteme is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold steady as it is suitable, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those that are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the methods: one of which is that you take a full fist of middle-sized grasping, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay the joints thus, and bend them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair; then put his broken arm on a stick, until it comes to the armpit, and have in the middle of a curve of wood, then bend on some heavy object or the minister extends downwards; then place the mirrors with the fracture even at their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands the ministers that one should hold what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold beneath all the joints, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Here is the translation:
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if apostemes (boils) occur, do not restrain them for just seven days, and apply a soft and gentle ointment, such as rose oil, until the boils are soothed; then hold steady, and the way to hold steady is that you place the dressing on the bruise, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and apply the bandage, and hold steady on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in a steady position, and nothing disturbs it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the bruise a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the bruise, two fingers' width on each side; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter, holding more strongly and less loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the alignment of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in order to restore the broken limb, and you doubt the boil, leave it to bind for just seven days, as we have said; then examine each day the bandage, so that no swelling comes to the area, or the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you adjust it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	Here is the translation:
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and it is the one that joins the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must gently extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large foscile, you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and raise the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm to the part below his hand, or to a bandage, and another ministration above. And then you put them in their proper place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disarray that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do so according to the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, glue .i. a dressing made of cerote oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply .i. the dressing subtly, so that the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of powdered mill flour with abundant water, afterwards put on the stables, and let the staple of the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have 8 or 10 staples or arms in more positions: either the fracture is in one of the bones, or in .ij.; and hold more above the fracture than other part, and less often in aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is stretched, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And treat the limb and the lien afterwards for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some evil accidents come to the limb, as it is accustomed to happen to the limb, then you must warm the limb with hot water, so that the evil accidents are appeased; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then resume the strapping, and if the liens are weakened and the bones disarrayed, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the patient's nerves cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then you must relax it a little, and let it be so for some days, until the nerves are corrected, and then hold steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if the patient's nerves do not come to the limb, then do not release it until 20 days. Or in the meantime, then he puts his hands on his neck, and makes his necks equal, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers having little fractures, and it does not come but rather frequently collapses many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient be crossed, and stands straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and puts them equal to the mirrors, so they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the bandages, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the wound; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is on the palmar side of the hand, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken hand; and then strap with a long bandage, and let the splint be of a soft leather, as thick as the palm of the hand, and strap it, so that it holds as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the back of the hand, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and stop the bandage between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break occurs at one of the fingers, it is a pocket, put it equal, as necessary; and strap it with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in another finger, like in the index or one of the others, put it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that comes after; or you tie them together, holding in place, or you put on a splint, as necessary; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and beware of what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face on it, then each minister extends his bond to his equal part; and that is when the breakage is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bonds goes towards the thumb, and the other bonds below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bonds are placed beneath the knee, and the extension is downward; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with their natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not form there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the ligature is made in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the surplus, then twist the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from under the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place these bandages on the fracture, and place a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the constriction, then begin to tie strongly two or three turns above the fracture; and as you go further above the fracture, there is less constriction; then take the end of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and untie the staples that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, until you come to the foot; and the constriction, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes no abscess nor inflammation or similar things.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then release it, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are pricking, then you must extract them, so much as one can; and if one cannot, then one must break the bone, and make a new route; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And it is not broken the thigh thus that one puts staples, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not close with the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the hip joint is restored to its place, either less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	It is known that in the groove of the knee there is often little breakage, but it splits many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure, or a perforation, and has all the pain, and feels the pain, and this is felt very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts equal what is rounded to its two, so that it is assembled as one can; then put the plaster, and I put a round staple, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it is convenient, then reward all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, just like hot abscesses and similar things; put to each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, where one is called by right "non-muscle", and the other is called "foscile"; and it has all the same fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the work is all here.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely awry.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn underneath. Then adjust the extension, and make it even, and place the stitches evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are several pieces, so that the extension is minor and lighter; and align according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that encompass the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap with two layers of bandages above and below, and place them in the middle, and at this point the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and nobody will hinder the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and you put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, it is seen in the break or wound; and every day move the leg to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if you cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaks of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes the bones of the foot come to a break and two pieces, and it does not happen except in several dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that you have broken bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on the pillow, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small tablecloth at .ij. plain joints, then hold the foot in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, then release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the toes broken, then reset them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that tablecloth I mentioned, and hold it in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each toe a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the tablecloth under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the foot, so that it holds the belly of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and attend to each accident as it befits.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone at the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is fractured, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline it towards the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the belly with cotton, and put a large amount as much as a sto; then take out the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or eight: if the fracture will be restored, and you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a chain to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the chain strongly, so that the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man or woman is fractured, restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into it, and attends to my book. For the fracture signifies more dispositions in the right way of restoration: then give the gift.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the wound, when it is broken, take an eye of a bone and bind the wound; then wrap drapels around, and let it be for two or three days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness we have stated testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol ointment, and you have nothing else, then restart to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bones appear exposed on the uncovered heart, then it is necessary that you put them in place gently with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not adapted to put equal in your hands, then set the instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take .iii. or .iiii., according to what is needed for each cure of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the limb at your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved iron be placed on the head of the exposed bone; and the button is set once, so long as it holds, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reduce the bone, as we have said, take the head of an instrument suitable for that, whether it be incisor or saw, to your power; then reset what is stuck in the bone with rough and minute scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then apply a black wine drapeil, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wound, such as cerote or other ointment, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the break; and many times fools have done this, and have caused death or corrosion to the patient.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, rough drapels, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, whether it be a day or two, to anoint the wound with a bow, if you have put wine on it, and apply ointment to heal wounds, as we apply tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb three times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it be sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the bone returns to its lightest movement.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it still resists, and it cannot be put back together but returns to its bone, knows that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you cure the wound with tenderness, and remove all those disjointed pieces that bring about this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is said in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it foolishly, for many times death comes from it, but let it putrefy; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come upon the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weakened after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and they could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to a multitude of medications; or due to too large movements, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, thus it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient's body thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the medication soothes the pain, until the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member which is twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And often the node is removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. And so the movement is readjusted to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted part is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be cauterized with iron, so it must be covered just up to the bone, with subtle and gentle incision; and put dressing and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to reposition immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the limbs swell, and by chance if it is reset to its place; because it is not good to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	In every way, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the abscesses are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reposition it lightly, and treat each limb as its treatment returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbone is dislocated and loose, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and become soft; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper positions more easily.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this manner the ministers touch the head of the patient, and insert their fingers as a pincer into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other fingers should be placed deftly, to set evenly; and instruct the patient that they relax their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if the waters of hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if you put on a soft cloth moistened with oil of rose and wax, then tie it lightly with many threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew what he wants lightly, and not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put in place for an hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and sudden attacks occur, and perhaps a solution of stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure colic.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a perilous condition; and many times he who has had it dies, in eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the inner side of the rib and the foot, and is often dislodged at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is towards the hip cannot be dislodged; if not, and if it does get dislodged at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the upper part of the bone; and the second is at the lower part of the thigh; and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the nerves; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the bone, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it quickly becomes swollen; to those who have enough flesh, it swells at the joints, and returns to the joints.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes swollen from an abscess, and he believes it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you test it, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axis, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axis touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an elbow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the toucher;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not forced to be reset, when it is new, or if the patient's fever is bad.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers raise the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers beneath the joint, and lift the joint with force above the level; and the ministers raise the hand, and stretch it above, then place it beneath; if it will be quickly set.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply mollifying and soothing remedies, such as a decoction of altaea and fenugrec and mellilote in water, and so be treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then be careful to settle the patient on their back, and place under the axilla a straight stick equal in length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors at the heel of the foot on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make a present effort, namely to have someone who is stronger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the axilla of the patient, and lift the axilla high, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister treats the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick into the ground, so that the head is also fixed like a pestle, and it should not be too big nor too slender.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed beneath the patient, but so that it has soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing upright on a long stick; then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of two cubits in length and four fingers in width, which has the head rounded so as to enter obliquely beneath the bone, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place the head of the stick beneath the bone, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the bone of the patient; and extend your arm above the stick of the length, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a chair of good width, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is thus, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster made with powder of soft mill, with incense and egg whites, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold it under the seat strongly, and turn the lien on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you massage a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after five or six days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in this chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five or six days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are pinched or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is of the ankle, and the shoulders, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and one administers another treatment; and cures until it be healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slow movement, if the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the joint is dislocated to points, and to points it returns; and it is dislocated from all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not replaced, for one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the wounded limb with the healthy one, then it cannot be seen openly. For the joint is shrunk, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that abscesses do not form, for if abscesses form, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to his .ij. hands; and his arms be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the wounded limb, from above and below, and adjust the joint to its small pieces together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and strengthens from the root of the palm the wounded limb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if he does not want to return to his place, then strongly extend it; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror touches the joint of his hand, if he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then put the joint in its proper form, until it regains.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, then put a dry plaster on with an abundance of egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it stay for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then release the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then recommence the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels gripped after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fatty mutton poultice, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, rub the joint temporarily, then put the poultice on again, and then enter into the bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see that, put on a warm, moist cloth with butter, and hold it in place; so it will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Always, it is necessary to reset it quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb is not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedy is that you place the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers, and align them evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and holds it still until it recovers.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it is necessary that you examine whether it is properly in place; then put the injured part of his hand on a table at extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the injured part of his hand on the table, and align it so that he places his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it now recovers, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain the swollen abscesses gently, and let them settle down so that they do not start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further than necessary, for as long as the hand is numb, and cannot hold onto anything at all: then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries; if there is no other means of relief except to cauterize in this case, and by chance it may be of no use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, set on the emplaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no grinding, then soak it in warm water, and rub it as long as it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then the fingers are straightened, and the dislocation is pushed back into its sockets as it recovers, then support the top of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be for a few hours, and then make it equal that hour; and do not tie it, as we have said, and loosen the joint from that hour, and make it move, and re-tie it; and do this frequently, until it is straight
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and thus you do it, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it as you have done before, so that it becomes healthy; and thus you do it, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	because of the dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without feeling, and cannot be retained, and many times some members are softened, or the hips or the two arms or joints.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the sciatic nerve is affected at four places; the one that is affected at the back is called "gilbositis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you rewarm the gilbositis that has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the entire tot.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment say grand promises, where there is no great profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the chest before, no one is safe from it;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in a straight line, and have support from behind him, so he does not slip;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix the stick to the ground firmly at the head, and another at the feet, and bind with a cord beneath the patient's joints, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the minister knows the ligaments, one to the head and others to the feet, among the .ij. tendons;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well fastened, the tendon as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forcefully, until it regains strength.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not regain strength by this cure, take a table of .iij. long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it regains strength to its joint; and if you see, then make it turn to the turning machine that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two thumbs at the head of the patient's arm of great size, and towards the feet two others, and between each thumb, from above and below, a palm's width apart;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each thumb a perforation, where the thong runs, and let the thumbs be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two thumbs have one turning thumb, because the thong turns, and have in two turnings two small thumbs of a palm's width, to turn the thong;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then put the thong that is among the assistants to the thong towards the head, and the other thong towards the feet at the other thong, and each of the ministers turns his thong with all the thong, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is aligned, then place on the plaster of desiccative with a quantity of egg whites, and then the bandages, and then the staple of a small table of two inches in width, which grips the limb of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a thong, as we have said, and use the subtle treatment of nourishment, so that it be sane;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything happens at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the instrument that we have mentioned before; and never should one administer on a piece of wood,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come in the rear of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens, because one must not have pride: by chance death may occur.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	One knows that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations suddenly, not like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parties: within and above, and in front and behind; and more within there are hollows, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the joints that are swollen from hot aposteme abscesses, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one who is about to faint, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who is about to faint, it is that they straighten their leg according to the accomplishment; however, they do not bend their knee without pain, and if they want to urinate, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when they walk, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it in the back are that they cannot stretch their knee, nor double, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is dislocated under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you recognize that the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no immediate cure; and it does not seem that it has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three manners of dislocation, you hasten that you turn the joint, and it is inside and outside, and the movement is to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it seems that you should apply a strong ministering, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he presses his hands beneath his haunches, then ties with a soft thread on the hip; and another tightens the top of the thread;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then you must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the parrison, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread on the root of the hip, and the limb that is beneath the angle, then stretch the thread above towards the angle, and towards the fortress;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister by the arm, and embrace the large joint of the hip patient, and stretch it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft cord above the two heels, and above the two knees, and so the sick leg is stretched two inches more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then be suspended from the top of a pole, and be one arm's length above the ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and another minister be suspended with the patient, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at its former shape, so adjust the patient, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch a cord properly on the sick leg, and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put the fire tongs, one at the head and another at the feet, then place the fire tongs between the hips of the patient in this shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet cloths wrapped around, so they do not burn the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and the surgeons hold equal with their hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press in this way as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, then you must stretch the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the surgeons' hand on the angle of the sick limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the forearm, it does not require stretching the patient downwards, nor lifting from the ground, instead it requires that it be just as if the joint was dislocated at the forearm, as we have said about the bedding on the .ij. joints;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for 2 or 3 days, then remove it, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are even, bind it, as before, and leave it for 2 days; then remove it, and make it comfortable enough so that the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as much as possible, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against their feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the joint in the shape of the knee; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has well-set his leg to his thigh lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for two or three days, then unbind it; and do not overexert the patient's effort, so long as the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not at all, administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, so that it may be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes numb, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it stretches before the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The limbs are easier to reset, and one must extend them gently with their hands when they are numb only slightly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and bind them with a strap, above the ankle, on the leg.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then prick the foot with your right hand, and then with the left. Do it several times, then stretch upwards, and beautifully bend the foot upwards;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do it several times, as we have said, bending and pricking the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, restart the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a small pillow firmly on the ground between his thighs, and wrap the drapery around, so that it does not hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then take hold of the thighs with one hand, and another hand stretches out to his hands or to the strap, so that it lies on the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and the straps should be between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches them.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a point, put the plaster and bandages on, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are above the knee behind, so that they are not too constricted.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are numb, hold them firmly; then loosen them on the third day or fourth, and defer going to the patient for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses break out, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them skillfully without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of your toes or fingers, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be for two hours, then dislocate; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patients die.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	do not be overconfident in the treatment, if you are not knowledgeable in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply gentle heat at the beginning of things to calm an abscess, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscesses will not come to life.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, then administer gentle heat to calm the abscess, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of desiccated herbs.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and with the dislocation to fracture, and you will find less difficulty, if you follow our instructions, and do what we have said about simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Explain the rule of physics
