O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything everywhere, thus the knowledge is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the powers except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should vivify it together with the ordination of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the ferrumens of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behoves him who undertakes to learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and resting of the veins moving and resting, and the issue of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the noun is little, and with the work is small; and likewise in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, should beware lest he falls into error and harms men; thus I have seen many times more of those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Here is the translation:
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's age, and the stone was large; if he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within 22 days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the doctor, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound; and the doctors, ignorant of the art, held the breakage against the wound as they were strongly bound, and did not leave the wound to heal, and left it thus terminated; and he ordered that it should not be touched again; and meanwhile the leg became entirely inflamed and the foot came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in a member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the entire member was almost lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another mirror that burst into an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into three divisions: namely, it is known, whether there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to take care of yourselves, so that evil people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in consideration, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and abandon the diseases that bring grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish people."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into twelve chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine for ague, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and the iron of cautery, and all that which is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and on the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we must remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest word and subtle science and hidden responses; and many wise men spoke about this, and agreed with it; and I suffered little from their words, for I reduced the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know the hot temperament with matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions with matter, some devised none and said that fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not valuable for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite said that fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all the way, no one interferes with it except those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless poorly named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines pass from member to member by alleviating, and bring to the sick member the grief of salutary healing; and thus happens to the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, because of its height and goodness of its substance, does not make this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to reveal the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily illnesses, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or you receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and take precautions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries occurring are often mitigated by the help of cauterization; and similarly, the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think otherwise, dear son, as foolish people believe; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no recurrence; and they say so; but it is not so, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its speed of healing, and for the virtue of its work and signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease returns several times according to the complexion of the patient and the virtue of the disease; and the excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, just as dense cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cauteries, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of golden instruments are more effective than those of iron, and did not say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and said that the eyes of cautery do not make putridity, but it is not seen because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some homes; and golden cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they loudly declared.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat the golden instrument, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they make a fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have made more suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because the way should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	For the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and they are used because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, ears, and multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solving and modifying the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and age and habituation of the patient can suffer; and then make a remedy for the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign on the affected area with ink, and make a slight impression by gently twisting your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand slightly, and examine the area to see if you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start the fire cautery again until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little cotton soaked in oil and place it inside, and put it on the affected area, and let it be for three days; afterwards put a warm compress wrapped in cloth; and leave it on until the inflammation subsides; afterwards treat the wound of the joint that is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said that the more one delays putting pressure on the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason it is necessary to help with motion.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one of them should leave the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said that one should leave the cautery so much on top, and thrust so strongly that one detaches from the bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (bundles) because the humors issue forth; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one must cure and sew.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvaging and mending for me, and I have often observed a healthy outcome.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use hiera and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and applying plaster; and if they perform the cautery that we mentioned before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little that we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we mentioned before, and make an incision in the place that is called "vasselz"; and it is a place where one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so that you do not see just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those on which one makes an incision on the middle of the head, and this is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with mundane medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of these profit: then I do cautery according to .ij. ways, that is to know medicinal aigu and fiery.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicinal cautery of aigu medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and remove the crust and recoat .i. spot as .ij. heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the handful of alum under the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie and hold well and leave for .xij. hours; and then dissolve and treat further the handful of oil, and leave the wound thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put on top a poultice in burdock so that it can putrefy in this.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ignition as long as it is healthy; and if you see that you have done thus with some burning medicines that I have written or treated in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the form it is:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more gently, so that the majority of the skin of the wound is cauterized; and lift your hand so the artery is not harmed, which is deficient, and abundance of blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards put cotton in the wound, and place it on the spot for two days; then I put moist cotton in a poultice, and then cure the wound of inflammation so that it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to cut the artery in this emigration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned before in medicine do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign above on the aching eye a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and hold still so you do not touch the artery and do not reach to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for what moves and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, which has great fear and trouble for the one who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; but I shall leave this in the middle of the road; however, I shall tell you how to restore blood when the artery is touched, and I shall show you where it fails in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. Coutelz; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments which we have mentioned in the section, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery, called "points", because of its shape.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the eyes, where the pain holds in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear then you have signed the place of the bite; and have ten points around each ear; after healing the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cautery is not fiercer than those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery at the appearances that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves with fluxes and evacuations of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third at the joint of the lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the top of the ear above a little from the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and let the cautery remain there until the majority of the blood is drawn out; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cupping that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cups be a little larger; after treating the place as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: one on the horns of the head, and one in the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of the sluggishness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	At this disease it is necessary to give the patient large and round mondified pills for the brain; afterwards, you place on the patient's head a poultice of mustard, which is written or treated in the book of poultices; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sensible thus, it is good; and if he is not, do it three times: make three cauteries on the skin of his head, descending just to the neck, and leave a space between each cautery of two fingers' width; and cure him as the others, and if you have seen them hastened, and the patient is suffering, do it in the middle; and if need be, do three others on the three horns, and cure until he is sensible; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" be done as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	Here is the translation:
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, make them gargle and chew modifying the treatment with good meat; afterwards they will raise their head in a mirror, and it makes .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo cautery as I have said to those who are paralyzed and mollified of body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-based according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive fluids or corrupt and gross moisture, then you should apply fire cautery to those areas as we have said to one who has been paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining excessive fluids into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what is written in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After taking the patient's head; after making a well-made torteil of linen, like a circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly in all parts; after applying the liniment, and washing with old berry broth; and heating it with tempered fire, so that the pain is alleviated; after removing the circle from within the head, and letting it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you see that the fire cautery is made by making points on the entire cautery area. This manner of cautery moistens the brain immediately; and then put cotton soaked in broth and grease of goose fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the heat of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When heat comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begins and gives drink to the patient something warming the head, and warding off all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding to reposition his head, and making him undergo cautery in the head, and making him undergo two cauteries on the temples if the descent of heat is in both eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and cover all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a poultice as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the vein, how you will staunch them; and no one makes a cautery or hematoma beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	Here is the translation:
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear as a cold, rheumatic superfluity; then it is necessary to perform the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the work descending from the eyes: .i. fire cautery on the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or burning beneath the bones; and if there is need for more, so cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	two courses of tears deep within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give a drink to the patient .iij. nine cups; afterwards, let the head rest, and perform cautery or mild burning of the olivaire cautery; and make .ij. cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the .ij. eyebrows, a little beneath the hair; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olivare" is thus formed.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the cauteries are made on the small veins as long as the small hairs are; and do not let your hand stray except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries in several ways: namely by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put cotton moistened with glaire of egg and muskillaige of persillion on the eye, then heat the cautery in this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little and many times, so that the heart is at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs lift at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in balm until the burning sensation is gone; afterwards cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place, as you did before; and if the hairs are disfigured, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have had this done for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the morification will be passed, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the parchment lifted thus as it was lifted by constraining fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the lever or the medicine has not worked, until your operations are even, and your eyes are in place; then put cotton soaked in bitter water, until the heart's arteries are clear, after curing the lever of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if it is necessary that you guard yourself well in your operation by great guarding so that no part of the medicine reaches your eyes.  And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the lever which is softened by the proper parchment, thus as you have done beforehand; after curing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foil of the dead mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, adjust your constraints; and do not respond with the direct way to him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position; and hold their temples between your hands in such a way that they do not move, nor nod their head; afterwards put cotton soaked in egg white or juice of persillium on the spot; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: it is shaped like a pen of vulture, assembled so that the cautery is thus; if you see, if it is pointed from one part to another, and if you see, if it is also as a tent; but always, this which is thus made is more useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is overturned, and removing the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, open it, and remove the filth from the wound; afterwards place the hot cautery in the shape of a bow, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail beneath the eye, so that your hands do not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	Here is the translation:
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make a quantity of .Z. of poultice; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the poultices do not fall on their oil; and it is necessary to put on the oil a patient cotton cloth in a stream of water or in awe: the poultice if it is the fistula, and the healthy part marvelously sanitizes.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have said, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the nave, and to bring the fistula back to the body of the nave according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times we have seen cracks in the lips that are called "pox", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of the head that we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And insert it hastily into those wounds as far as life comes forth; after treating the sore with cerote until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has made putridity and rot, and becomes fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after boiling or piercing the fistula, and holding your hand so that the iron rod comes forth at the fontanelle, and behind the ear; and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the source of the corruption and cut out the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	two movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it's not effective, then put the head of the patient in your healthy one; afterwards heat the cautery to the point where it will come later in such a manner that you place a candle under the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and resume the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it steep for an hour and rinse forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the cures of medicine do not prevail, then it is necessary to resort to cautery in two ways: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of borax is such that you grasp borax of a vaiche, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil it in borax water, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and borax water become cold, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron rod so that the force reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery is such that you grasp an iron rod or copper cane, and it should be thick so that the force does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, so that it forms a crust after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good borax water in the impression of that cautery, and then roots firmly; and this is the form of that cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery according to the chief that you would want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the swellings
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swellings are from flux and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then heat the fire cautery to make the form that comes after, and open two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is needed, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on cotton wool moistened with balm as long as the wound is open; afterwards cure the limb with ointments and tinctures until it is healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures flow onto the channels of the arm, and likewise when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medicines; afterwards make fire cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little. Afterwards make another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and let it be the cautery which is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the injury
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor shivering, and it is an old disease, then apply fire cautery on the strength in their veins; and another cautery between the muscles; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, apply fire cautery by pricking the entire cautery which is called "poins" because of its form beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just below ..., or wherever it hurts. Afterwards, treat the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them in one application.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is accustomed to it on his back and on his side; after lifting the heart which is within the small of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has 22 nerves where it forms:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as far as it reaches the side, and thus comes the figure of the cautery with 3 cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is done with the cautery that has 22 nerves, because the figures of cauterization are 6 cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a thread, and it is the form of the cautery that has 22 nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it adjusted on this nerve because there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting fire cautery on the affected area with oil; after that, have the patient rest, and do not move their limbs too much for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, that little thing happens rarely, then do cautery on the thick skin of the clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with fire cautery of the pleura.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should do fire cautery on the pleura with roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, as large as you can find, and dry it, and make it as thick and long as your fingers; and boil it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cautery. Do fire cautery between the forked part and the neck, and do small fire cauteries a little lower on the part that is beneath the beard; and do fire cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little; and do fire cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and between the sides of the chest, far from the fire cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it open as if sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And certain ancients said that no man should use fire cautery, similar to a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and suddenly the pain ceased, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the spleen
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they resort to three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of these manners is that you make three fire cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cautery, and let the patient be placed on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation:
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Here is the translation:
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery does not work for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the place of the pis; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, let the cautery be opened by a gentle purification for a long time, and do not delay the treatment of the patient's disease after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a keyhole that we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is written here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauter without turning. And do not enter too much inside, lest you stir up the citrine water, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on both legs, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from top to bottom, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without curing, so that the water exits; after curing with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and strongly, if you make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel everywhere, one subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each island, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and consist of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all divided below the almond date a little and a little in triangles, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then one should apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cauteries; and let the cautery stay long enough. After curing the limb until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you touch thelul, if you heat the cautery that seems suitable, and then apply it entirely to the affected thelul area; and let your hand be so guided that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows freely; do this one or two times, and if there is much of thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of wounds benefits so they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Here is the translation:
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the kidney comes from cold, and great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman's advice, then it is necessary that you apply cautery on both sides of the kidneys to the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a straight line, it will be of greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply cautery on the upper part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our thumb; and make a cautery above the back, or if you need to do so; and make the clavicle cautery according to the method mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, if they feel great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the department are visible, so it is necessary that you cautery the patient on the hip joint with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauteryed the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of the olive tree, large and deep, and let the cauteries be as wide as all the wounds; and treat until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is ancient: then it is necessary to purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is in three ways: it is to know that you assemble burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint according to this form, and make a good profundity and greatness, and leave between each cautery the width of a finger, and let it be olive tree cautery; at no time do they make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery is made in a circle around what we have previously said about the dislocation of the thigh; but make it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the skin are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is in this manner that one performs the sciatic treatment, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make them .ij. cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little to the left side; and whether it is a cutaneous cautery, and whether the skin around the knee is burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers from the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called «points».
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, then make more of it; and if they know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was lost. Afterwards, a ventosity of the belly occurred, from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parties together, make cautery on one and on the other, in this manner. // And the wise men say in the cautery of the thigh, that it is thus: make a .i. iron rod as big as a small nail of a finger, or a little less, and let it be between the skin and the bone, just to the measure of a walnut; and let the rods be above two inches, and let them also be like our nails, and they have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the thigh of the affected hip, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once .i. cautery sessions and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment is finished until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and few see those who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is applied.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or too great an evacuation, or from similar matters of cold expanded material, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is suitable after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterization which is called "poins"; and if you see fit, make two or three cauterizations at the clave mole according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then apply the cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the cautery should penetrate to a certain part of the spine evenly. And if you want to, then apply the cautery around the spine with a poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in weakness which is in spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this method.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need to prick on the face of the foot, then make cautery at every cautery point. And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make cautery on each knee .iij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, to the entire olive-colored cautery; and if you have more mastery, if you do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary so that the heat of the cauter is sufficient.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fingers .ij. lines; and if there remains any pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the thighs or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good government and you purge flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the womb
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the patient arrives in anguish, and the bowels are descending into the groin area, which is new; if it happens that when you examine the wounds, he does not eat anything on that day; and he uses things that ease the stomach, so that the flatus descends from his stomach; after this have him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the bowel is repaired, and you reattach it with your fingers, and mark the spot below the wound on the bone of the finger, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it becomes white and he feels sensations. Then reattach the bowels to their place; and have him hold his hand so they do not return backward; and prepare the thighs of the patient well, and put a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the foot that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach just to the bone; and be subtly careful that the bowel does not slip when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. And it happens that the cauteries for children should be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; after 3 days cure the wound of the cautery of borax so that the eschar is removed; after curing other wounds so that he is healthy, and lay the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it happens that his nourishments should be lax for a long time, so that the bowel does not slip when he gets up to go to the chamber.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	Here is the translation:
de la routure dou ventre	from the gut of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When gut wounds come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, then make them into a fire cautery of the same quantity, and be aware of the third part of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the angles of this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first mark the level of the notch and make a line along the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fire cautery claw. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	Here is the translation:
de meselerie	of the malady
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The maladies are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the malady that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take care that the malady is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the malady, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. emmi the head anew, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the haiterel; and leave so much space with your hand that the cautery comes just to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is scattered throughout; and it pert manifestly, then it is necessary that you make the cauteries of these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery on the nose, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large on the chest and .i. another on the loins, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the rear of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that when you make a cautery, the more it helps, and it is profitable; and know that the maladies do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already almost completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the ferrous. After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures so that it may be healthy.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and emplasters, but it does not heal, then one should perform cauterization on the member according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the thickness of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healthy. And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the inflammation is removed; and never intervene if it is not knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of swellings
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then one should cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colocynth and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the skin until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And some wise men say that one should do cautery also in the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and a more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it takes time to heal or because of the excessiveness that it does, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauterize around with many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten healing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, heat up the cautery of that which is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner so that the course of the putridity is alleviated. After the cure, until he is perfectly sane.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a mangling of members, for it eats away the members just as fire eats away dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery by fire, then heat up the cauteries little and greatly, according to what is necessary for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted may be removed. And then leave it .iij. days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice made with oil so that the burns from fire are removed, and all corruption. After the cure, generate charms.  And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places. And this mangling has never been cured by medicine except with fire cautery; but all cautery by fire is of great aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	for the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it happens that the feet are afflicted by a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large swollen thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat a cautery iron like a pen of vaulted, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; then you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the font of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of savory herbs boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be disrooted from their roots. Then cure the foot of ointment, anointing so that it may be healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by the defect of the body, and often it happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or copper, or a pen of vaulted, and put it on the nail and the surrounding area, that is to say for porous veins; and put the cane so that it pierces all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water going deep to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot all from its roots. Thus do after another, until you eradicate those that are in the body, then cure with ointments that engender health.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you apply three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each spine; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for olive oil cautery; if they stop shivering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-producing pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Never appear by default the bodies that are bathed, or pus-producing pimples, that come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary first when they appear that one applies fire cautery on each head of the pimple: a subtle fire cautery of mistletoe wood, of which the point is seized by fire, or of aristologe root, or of lens-shaped cautery. And never are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are dislodged the superfluous things from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that it be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Here is the translation:
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever it happens to none, if you hasten to put your indexed finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very still so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and no longer issues; then apply fire cautery more or less small and large as they are all red; then take .i., great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is directed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery still so that the blood is restained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve which is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the blood does not flow from the artery, it cannot be well stanched in the same way as when the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be tied and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding tightly with bandages or puts things around it, or similar things, does not profit if they do not do it well.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it be rested on the wound and on the vein; and do not move the finger, but move the malleus of cold water often so that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and rested; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter, every disease where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter near the foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method, for one finds more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who hurt themselves with their illness so that they die quickly due to the violence they find in their disease, and because of the greatness of their evil; and it is right to have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there is one who gives you his sense, and says: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is despised. It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	Here is the translation:
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is the translation:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen it hastens death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving aside the work on some cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so much that it could not be supported; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it would die, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as it needs to drain, and see here the form of the spatula-like instrument.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the membranes of the head covered with each part, and the water flows out as soon as you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all excess moisture. After, hold back the edges of the wound with drapels and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be so until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound by taping and by ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give meat to the patient, dry food with little excess moisture, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the edge of the water; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and make a wound according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and beware of bleeding, so that the patient does not die from the deterioration of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens that a disease is called "catarre" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not benefit, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization with fire which cleans the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary, when you cauterize the views, that the patient makes a gesture with his head; afterwards scrub the place of a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with all the cloth; then look where the veins are, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are a little hidden; then mark the veins of the inch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument, as much as the vein reaches just to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the pointed instrument below the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers wide across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and what is necessary to put blood flow thus it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the syphac, if it covers that apostemes do not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the migrating (or possibly "of the wandering")
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the migrating pain arrives, and catarrh is sharp, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and apply cauterization, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is a little restored thus that in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then strip off the patient's cloak from some dirty cloth, then rub the bone with some rough cloth, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery opens manifestly; then take the spatula made of wood, whose form is this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Here is the translation:
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vein with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when they are removed, if one is cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as you operate, if you hasten to cauterize, or you fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this present, if you put on the vein your finger as long as the blood congeals, and raise the vein of cold water until the blood ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and easier in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid holding too long on the flesh.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the .ij. knives .i. thick of a span, and then when you have signed on the edges of the .ij. veins, and you put the sharp iron rod so that it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. veins; and should be separated between the .ij. parts because it is not suitable for this cautery from start to finish; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are on the head of strong fire, and it does not profit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become red, and feel in front an ambulation as if of frenzy; and if they are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the ardor of the tears, thus there is need of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "confused cure", and it is that you make a row for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions in the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be thus, as three fingers deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the other three costals by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound has the quantity of three fingers in traversing the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you prepare a piece of sponge and much of drapery to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula, agitated by three fingers from the place where it is in the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Here is the translation:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision, it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, not very sharp, and that's its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, and the instrument as far as it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as much as the incision continues until what opens at the heart, and then do the same in the middle incision until the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and express the limb for the taken blood; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and put on moistened drapery with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that abscesses do not form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will show you great pleasure, then apply the treatment of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments with which one cures wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	two edges of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no vein receives accustomed catarrh, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in pain with aching, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that catharr come from many veins, and the death cure that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another equally large one. I. puncture. And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach just to the bone; and hold your hand away from the temples that move with the hammer; and when the bone is exposed, then suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put cotton much, and tie with linen thread; then lay a moist dressing over it with wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is drained, then you must rub the bone so that it starts to grow, then cure things that cause inflammation, which make it worse.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take nine parts of flour of wheat, and twelve parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds to cure them completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When the flesh grows in the ear or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, nor does it grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the pus, if it distills any tiny drop of violet oil or oil of sisament, then one begins extraction; and when it is done, the nostrils are stopped up with cotton or linen; and the ear is closed above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work, one begins extraction as pinces subtly, because this is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it does not work as pinces, it is good; if not, one begins extraction with the onion-like subtle double-layered tool; and if it does not work by this, make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or perforate the ear strongly, and stop up what is inside the cane with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then extract in this form, for many times it works as we have said; and if it does not work in some manner, take glue from taking the osselets, and put on some instrument which is at a point to do this, and put a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the pus or whatever it may be, and extract.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not work from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess forms in the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient's head calm, and draw out blood according to its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear above, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty or dependent part; and let the incision be as a crescent moon, until you reach the pus, then extract according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and continue the cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot exit, administer a subtle spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then use subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the water where it falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the utmost care of condensing first, and wraps the ear with much cotton. And be careful on that same ear where the water is. If it flows forth through this, it's good. If not, take many pieces according to the length of your finger, and heat them a little at the fire; and put the patient in one or two holes of their ear, and raise on its own feet from another part, and fasten with another piece on the piece that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from piece to piece until the water flows forth entirely, and thus it flows forth entirely; and if you see, take a joint, and put one of the heads into the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most gentle joint is roasted; then redo another part of other joints until the water flows forth entirely, as we have said in the piece.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as we have said in the division, cure it thus; but if it is of great body that one cannot feel it, administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun: if no worms appear, prick them with subtle pincers; and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is their form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck it out completely with the candle; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, stop up the cotton candle as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of what is their form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be of silver or copper, narrow below at a small hole, and above covered for distillation; and to press inside the distillation, an instrument of well-made copper is necessary for this, and if you see take the scraper and envelop it in a point of cotton; then throw your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle should be in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press with your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or flows from the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be slightly warmed by fire, so that it is not too cold when distilled in the ear; and beware that it should not be too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a boil inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes deep into the ear, if one cannot see them well; and sometimes it happens that the hole is small, and one sees them well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes deep inside, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look within: if you see apparent opilation, then the work has all this spathumile from which it is formed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting before and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the opilation is from a boil or sore of the ear, then you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until the charcoal is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is deeply embedded in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and carefully shave a little at the fire, then place it at the curve of the ear. If you feel the operation where the patient feels great grief in the hearing, pierce lightly, and be careful not to graze the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and the malleus in the Egyptian fashion.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do nothing for a day until the wound is suppurated, or take a tent and the malleus in aqueous rose, and powder with burnt vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace it with another malleus made of cerote, which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is lifted; then treat until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood discharge comes out, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the blood discharge which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decay, if the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is good, and the cautery operator after the incision is worthy; and many times they repair, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the sprain
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times there come in papers from the eyes things that seem like sprains in their form and hardness, and for this reason this malady is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the operations are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make the dressing large, then scrape off each light part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not hurt the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble at a costure, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make force, for the ointments restore quickly and in vain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and hold the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, do not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, leave the oil of salt water, and cure the place of what injures so that the patient may be healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	There is a fat which is formed in the membranes above, and this happens more to infants than to old people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have morning cataracts, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces then, and sleep on them, and their membranes become moist beneath their eyebrows, which swells and appears covered with exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press the liquid with your fingers and feel the fat entering within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a cloth of linen, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, and places it on them; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fat is gathered within the circle; then makes a moderate incision in the skin with a sharp scalpel, not larger than the wound made for a vein opening; and makes the skin deep enough until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take out the fat then, taking a piece of cloth between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire skin up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, apply a little pressure to the wound lightly so it opens; then extract as we have said, then place a dressing in oil and water, and put it on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who bruise themselves and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then heal until they are healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then heal with soothing plasters as much as possible until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs next to each other that are not natural, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so much that it is due to the destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by cautery combined with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and suturing or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick there a needle at all points; and be it beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn to the ruler; then make in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, all the spatula copant, from the large scissors up to the small; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, if like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a piece that is masterful, cope with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the lines that you have signed, and start from the large scissors up to the small; and be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then prick the onion in one of the angles of the heart, and scrape everything; then assemble the lips at a seam with a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads above the eyebrows at all things gluing, if you see fit to do so; and if not, take no care, then leave the seam and the threads until .iii. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without a seam of things drying and constricting, for the paper revives suddenly from the wound and its assembly, but the seam is murderous (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iii. inches separated according to the form that is here;
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this which overcomes small equal forces similarly to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or have a thread. And insert it into the figure; and insert another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them equally between your two threads; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and often it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the papyrus and make them within according to what I have said, and then make artificial canes by art, and subtle threads as long as the papyrus and the width of the spatula is; and take thus the heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what overcomes the papyrus of the eye, and extract the artificial canes from the formed parties; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which will be tightly bound will die and putrefy and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound takes hold of forces, then cure it so that it becomes healthy; and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is lifted, and they do not prick with hairs anymore; and this is the form of the 12 canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a delicate silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the hunt another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the two threads; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be in the shade so that the operations are declared, for this is a subtle and minute operation, then put the needle all along the hunt at the root of the implanted hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put into the hunt that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come forth all along the hunt in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom along all the thread that you had ordered, so that the hunt comes forth through the pertuses above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 12 hours or 24, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out from the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair from the natural locks, and let it be elevated with that which you leave, so that it is elongated and then set free.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the rotting of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting of the eye occurs, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment is that you split open the suture, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and bind it so it may be healthy; and it does not matter that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but I work with softening things, like fenugreic; and rose water or attar and seed of linen are cooled, and ointments of dyapulum founded on none of the eyes, and enveloped in a bandage, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the success of this treatment is that you take care to guard against it not swelling according to its original form; and these treatments that we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two double threads, and prick the flesh, and make the double thread pass through the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread appears at the head of the flesh; then the flesh is placed above all the needle, and the cope is at a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the papyrus returns according to what is necessary, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the papyrus, and make two cuts or sew within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two cuts at the angles of the incision that you have made a cope, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape may be as the shape of a letter which has no "j" curve; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then heal with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to ingeniously bring back the shape to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need of work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	you burn of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this burn has affected men in such a way that the paper above is scorched with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to apply the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up high; and hold it as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too pointed or blistering the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled thing, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes salty in the oily water, and raises a gentle and cool swelling; then put between the paper and oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a soft and abundant ointment; and after three days use a gentle and soothing cologne, and similar things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the corner is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but resembles a soft, moist, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other resemble an encumbrance towards the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and holds the paper in one hand, then coils the finger as small double pincer, and holds it above; then takes a needle, and inserts a horsehair, or a cow's hair, or an ox's hair, and strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and sticks it into the finger, and pierces through the entire needle, and ties the finger with a thread and holds it above, and strips off all the hair that grows around the finger which follows the curve and the seam of the hair just at the head, then gathers the remaining in the root of the arm to the entire subtle and small forces, and leaves the natural skin or arm, so that by the incision does not disturb the body's accustomed flow; and never holds the finger to the nail solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then strips off all the subtle skin above where it is in the form.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the subtle skin does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the seam is not perceived; and after the incision, put a little of warm broth in the oil, and make a collar of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the finger is not numb, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of finger is cured with medicines; and grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil from the patient, and take the subtle skin a little gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And you raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at no point and the reason is pressed upon, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium made of litargire and red collyrium, and stop up to the other eye; then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it is all restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, so that an abscess does not form, then heal it first, and cure the hot abscess as much as it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh shows pain in the eye during the night by great annoyance, then suspend it on the onion, and cover one part and not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the red collyrium made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Here is the translation:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, if you apply the oil of broiet or distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil a cotton with water of egg, so it may be assured of hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the blood flows upwards, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing things that appease hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus you will often do for the characters affected in the eye by this means.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you adapt the treatment according to the natural weakness of each oil; and according to the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is sufficiently strong for that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered on the oil, and they take away from the sight its work and afflict the oil for two years. It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the oil, in which there are, is strong, and there is no other malady besides the redness; then thus the coil in such manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy place, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be treated with a ninth-degree cautery, in the fourth sign of the zodiac according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you should subtly coil the forces of those veins, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see that you are removing those veins from the eye; and be careful not to blotch the eye at the points of the spathules, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with anything but those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collar to correct what is corrupting the corrupted seat.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are not able to coil all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some days until the pains are eased and are assured of a hot abscess, then resume according to this method which is presented beforehand so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if it takes away all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asper chief", and it should be made from iron into a chief straightening, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so that you know that this corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicines having evacuating properties.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the places are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another way than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by medicines waters, and when it is uncovered thus take .i. forest according to this form, and let the iron head be at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated up to the chief as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put on the bone of the armier, and estrange your hand from the oil a little, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and feels the patient through that which comes in if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have signified to you, and when the flesh grows and endures the places, thus goes the matter to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose or diminution, it means that you should treat the patient; then apply a healthy poultice, then put on warm dressings or heated plaster to suck out the infection, then apply it to the eye. Make a mixture of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and cover it with bandages and drapery; the way to arrange the drapery is that you should take moderately soft ones, and double each in three, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed by the eyes; then hold it firm above a hard bandage, and reapply the warm dressings to suck out the infection; then remove the warm dressings and leave the eye steady day and night, and if it becomes inflamed, it means that you should tighten it strongly; then remove the dressing after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, reapply the poultice and drapery and the warm dressings until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the web-like membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the web-like membrane, then open, and come from papers like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you cover the view, the operations are such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part just below, then put another needle where there is a double thread on the affected part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with the double thread and tie one part of the membrane around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and apply it to the eye, already moistened with abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads adhere with the membrane, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy; and many times the wound is held back by the membrane each part of a circle of drapery, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends to the eyes, and inserts itself in this way; then it is extracted until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye, appearing to be inflamed and swollen, but it's not inflammation; and the manner of appearance of the wound is that you make the patient sit on a .i. prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so that you see the socket coming into view beneath your eyes; then be steady, and don't let the light shine through, and look at the patient's things as they should; and if it doesn't settle down, know that it's inflammation, and if the settling of the socket is not prepared as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue .i. point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny tissue and the cornea, until the socket is opened; and when it is opened, distill into the eye warm honey mixed with milk, or warm or fenugreic honey, then be cured by another treatment until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from the inflamations of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Here is the translation:
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep in fear, but make a subtle wound, then put in the maggots, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, the patient will appear to be sleeping, for he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move their head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to their disposition until the third day; then unbind them in that same dark house, and test their vision, and make them see certain things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary not to do this during the time of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to do this, for the water mounts quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	if abscesses come, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on its frame .i. a golden ring to cover for some days, and be still in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into his cases; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they made alum salt, which draws out the water, but however I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them go astray; and they are of arain properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And they are the head of water of this same subtlety, and the last in four angles aague.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nail
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No time do nails or flesh arise with diverse wounds, because there are some that seem like scorpions on the foot; and if it has flesh stained with a dark color, and if it has flesh of a pale color. In this case of those wounds which is pale, and not stained, you must hold the patient between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those wounds, and treat them with fire; then take what you have placed to sustain on the subtle spatula of one part, until you know that this wound is completely opened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything, i.e. subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, drain it as it ought; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stagnant and all the flesh is burnt away, then apply a poultice or ointment of water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nostrils are open, and moisture comes up to the palate, it means they are healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it ought, it means there is a blockage in the upper passage, because the instruments cannot reach: then you must take a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with our hands, and have an interval of about a span or less; and put the patient's head near the filament in their nose, and draw it through the nostrils so that it comes out through the mouth; and many times children are taught thus as a lesson, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold one end with one hand and the other end with the other hand, and pull them alternately like us who have the thread. Do this until you see that the nostrils have cleared that blockage, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of blockage; and then put a small cane into the nostrils for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a cane, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the head near the nose, and grows and becomes large, so it is visible to behold; and therefore you must apply a cautery or burning medicine at the beginning, and burn all around, then place over it a hot cautery or medicine; and if it delays in healing until it is large, take care if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can apply everything, then the patient sees and feels no fear, and cures the dry and withering things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is touched and wounded
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be aware that when continuous flux comes into one of these cartilaginous joints, it benefits little, for in some homes. Therefore, you must consider this when it happens to no one, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then add the .ij. levers to a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if the levers are already dislocated on one side and the other, you must scrape all parts of their skin until they are healthy, then assemble the .ij. levers into a bandage, and tighten, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense burned; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the treatment is that you prepare the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of veal, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them with pincers and cover in each part; then apply the liquid after the incision of vitriol broth, so much that the blood is staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Here is the translation:
des sordens	the filthinesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scurfy things that are ugly and bitter; and sometimes they are black and yellowish and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and you remove the teeth or the scurfy things that appear, until nothing remains; and do the same for blackness and greenness and yellowness and other stains, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasps with which one removes the teeth have other forms than those with which one removes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay doing so as much as you can, because this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then, so one has no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained from removing it, it is necessary that you are certain of the painful tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth removed; and all the while the bad tooth remains, for we have often wanted to do this with these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth everywhere; then hold it with your two fingers or subtle pincers at the first joint and joint, so that it is well held; and then fix the pincers firmly; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Here is the translation:
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Here is the translation:
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	Here is the translation:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the drawing, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be toothed to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the drawing, then it is necessary that you put on the cotton cloth moistened with burr.i. a day or two., until the limbs are softened, then you remove the tongs which are called "algefri", from which the head seems to be in the shape of a beak; and let them be made thus like a file, and that is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue from all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", it is to know plainness, from which this is their form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by itself, that is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one aids with this instrument which has many grooves, from which it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are presented in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it should be these instruments strong so that they do not break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the patient shows them, for there are certain illnesses where the ancients did not teach a point of instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break at all in the cartilage or in the other bones, or it decays, if one seeks the instruments that they need, as I have told you, and you aid with gestures, from which it is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so it does not dislodge, but it can hold and ostrude; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is porosity in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in delicate women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not aligned after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot make it straight or smooth: then take the file; and if it is sharpened with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron and is sharply pointed.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the jaw closes little by little every day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file a part of the tooth as it is in its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is thus like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little every day lightly, so that it does not move until it settles; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth locks
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	Here is the translation:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, set it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it who is not wise and suffers, and never make the form of a tooth of cow's bone, and set it back in its place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and stay there for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of covering the lien of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Never is it the lien that comes from under the tongue or naturally, which we are born with; or by accident of a wounded palate; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous lien of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you remove the uncleanness and cover the large liement; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the place of hot rose water and of hazel, then put under the tongue a thread of linen; and apply to the patient each night, so that the places cannot become sore. And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the place vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see that it is of a fouled color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is chancre; and if it is declining to blenchor, and there is moisture, then remove the uncleanness, and make a subtle spatula, and remove from one part and another; and if the wound does not heal according to your operation, then put on vitriol bruised so that it is stained, then return to your operation until you treat everything fully; then lift up the place of hazel and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes there come abscesses in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "ij. amandres". When you treat them, as we have said in the division, they are not healthy, so beware: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, likewise for fear of bleeding; but let it be until it ripens, and then you will operate on it, or it would rupture by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to cover, but first check if the abscess has calmed down and is pacified. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be healthy, and open their mouth and take hold of the tongue between their hands, and press the tongue beneath all the instruments, so that it takes its form; and let it be of silver or thin copper, as one makes a pipe.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the oncin and fix it in the amandre, and pull it upwards more than you can; and pull nothing from the tiles with it, then cover it with the instrument, so that it takes its form, which seems a force; and all the veins are curved, and one end to another, and are very sharp, and are made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tongs, so that it takes its form.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be careful on one side and name on the other; and when you have cut into one of the arteries, if you cut the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with lukewarm water, and lukewarm and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, if you gargle the patient with lukewarm water, or remove the pomegranate cores which are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is closed; then heal it so it becomes healthy; and never again grow other abscesses in the throat except for those .ij. arteries, if you cut them thus like the .ij. arteries together.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Here is the translation:
de l’uve	of the egg
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the humor descends to the egg, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very thick and round, it is called an "egg". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme is appeased, and it is subtle; then you must take it. And the one which is round and assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of fuse color or black, then you must cut into it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calendula and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it thus, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot has an instrument that cuts in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it is of silver or copper, and one of the heads is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, you often repeat this, until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this unless at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in its head a crumb of egg, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the crumb of egg does not let the vapor pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether, healthy.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or something else; so it is necessary that you try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly; and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be dislodged by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will draw it out again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument with a hook according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instruments be at the top of the head so that they can more lightly enter the throat, and hold the head high up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it does not go well, nor does it get stuck inside; and it is good that the patient inserts the instrument, because it is inserted or the thing is easier; if they insert it below, where it draws out all the instrument equally, as long as it is drawn out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the swelling of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is suitable for the swelling, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the swelling, draw it out with a small hook, or subtle tenaculum that is suitable for this. And if it is not successful, take a hooked needle, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then pull out or cut away with the hooked needle, iron hot, and make it bleed often. And if you hold the patient's arm all day, take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in, swallowing deeply, and move it with his hand often; and if the swelling feels the cold, shout.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not bleed as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asphaltide, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will soon become less painful. And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered by a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that perforation let the head of the instrument be; then pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue forth, but goes just to the swelling; and the swelling will now subside, and if it does not bleed, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that it be purged by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument to which one treats the blood, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the gorge; and it has resemblance to a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. manners where one is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture. And the second manner is through the veins or they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if an abscess does not need to be pierced, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crude, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like an abscess that are of the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them so long as they are porous inside, by chance they corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, because it is a cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is of the principal member, and you delay the perforation so long as it becomes mild, it will harm the principal member; or if it is of the foundation, one pierces it in such a way that it becomes mild; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess crude without complete digestion, unless it is of the foundation, which does not putrefy inside, and becomes long and fistulous; and one cannot heal it in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the sign of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminishing of pain and of redness, and the debate and arrangement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it opens mouths; and be the perforation of the long body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal things where there is no putridity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worth more that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, it hurts the body with venom, and is full of much ordure; and by chance they harden the skin and the underlying part of it. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to which members they have mastery.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to recognize universally in treatments of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of ulcers
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the wounds of the head come from small abscesses, and are ways for us to be in tiles, like a gouty swelling, and many have similarities. There is fat and suchlike where there is moisture, like poultices; and if there is something hard and piercing at the cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary. And the operations of the incision are so that you experience all .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then make it flow downwards from the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape without leaving any peel that contains that moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian fashion, if it is present; if not, in water and in oil, and in employing the poultice, and leave it until another day; and this corrodes what remains of the nit. And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain any longer of the nit; then cure the wound of incision in a suitable way, so that it may be healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, from the length; and apply your onguents, and scrape everywhere, and put all your care into treating the area where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, then do what I have told you afterwards. And also do with the abscess if it is piercing, and of cutting and of treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incision on the piercing abscess and moisture, is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of these were .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman's head; and found the abscess like a crusty stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had made a hole in it, one would have made a wound as of a stone. In other abscesses coming from heads, because they are those that come from children's ears, the operation should be done within three days at most, depending on the swelling; and the treatment should be done as is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scabs
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times apostemes occur on the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are connected to each other. And each scab is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scabs are many. There are those that contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. In this case, you see good disposition in the body, and it is similar in color to the body, and changes from one part to another, and does not stray far; so it must be that you cut above, and scrape each part, and open the two lips of the heart as once, if you are skilled, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and pull gently, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not spread too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, so you can complete it; then seek with your finger if there remain small scabs, if you cut them and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, do not think that you should cut into this scab at its root, but tie it off with a double strong thread, and let it fall away by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scab, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so there is no more superfluous matter from the size of the scab. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and pull forth, and sew as we have said. Those scabs that hold superfluous matter, pierce it where it appears rotten; and pierce thus as before mentioned, in dependence, then you will mix with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment that charms, so it may be healthy.
de squinance	of bruising
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old people told and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have bruising, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the arm of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Here is the translation:
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and they are accustomed to being cautious at the incision of the epiglottis so there is no point of bleeding, and the vessels are long in inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then cut the kernel as far as it reaches the uvula; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cauterize the syphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the incision of the phlegm of the uvula which falls out through the broken tone, and by the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open up a little piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew all together beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so that it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One must not delay until the throat is entirely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then one covers the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this reason the doctor orders to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they command to touch the wound and treat it until it is cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of her arm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein flow further than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I did not have any difficulty with the young woman for she was rough of voice, and recovered afterwards to her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I saw that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural does not have any impediment.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one is similar to a thick node, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and he has fear, and it is not suitable to work with fiery fervor except in the one who is small, and he tries and searches throughout the entire interior.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I do not grasp, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if it stops, if as one stops the nouns, and draws to its entire coffin, if there is a point.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and heal it so that it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of the nouns
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways are ours, of which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I tell all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the evacuation is heat and fever, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it completes the purification; then restore the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the disease there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. syphac, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to six similarities, whether gray, or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take hold of or more moist spot that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have penetrated to the heart, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the entromissoire, and take care that it does not break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	Here is the translation:
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the swelling has gone down, it knows that it is fat, if they make an incision in a cross, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and wrap around the hip where you will find it healthy with the noult;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot straighten it healthily, then pull it back by pieces so that there remains nothing.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains nothing, then it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it stays a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things that calm the hot abscess, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is great to us, then cut the .ij. lips of the wound, and treat what injures the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if you find it contrary or otherwise, hasten and employ the virtue of vitriol broiet, and let it lie .ij. days or .iij., until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that it is demoreit from the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Behold the forms of inward instruments, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrin iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing the abscesses of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the onions are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if an onion has three corrugations in three manners thus;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if an onion has three corrugations, and are thus of three manners; and if an onion has two corrugations, and onions with a single corrugation only, and are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of those who are operated on is cutting, and of such there are some who do not cut more than one part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these inward-growing things are the almonds placed in bandages, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not make use of it more than in the flesh of the body, such as legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar things;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the scrapings of fistulae, according to this form, by which one bleeds blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the body that is connected to the gathering of veins, and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never inflame the limbs of certain men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem like feminine limbs;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain lazy and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to soothe according to this form of this line up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicinal ointment in the form of a charm, then bring together the .ij. lips of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and the limb falls downwards, and is ameliorated by its greatness if it has happened to women, if they make a .ij. stitch above, through .ij. similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of one being held to the other at the end of one and of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then remove the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and I will show you what we have said about dressings and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it may be healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the corruption of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it rejects the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that form under the seats are kinds of hard scrofula sores where there are ribs, and if there is only moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture must be treated according to this form, from line b to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire tumor that is in the abscess is evacuated, then fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and cure by applying ointment to the extent that it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then they do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is open, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses occur, and also it happens to have an inflamed and abscessed vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes this as being due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel estrangement; and when it is by the vein, then there are reasons for apparent fear;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the arms and in the groin and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in him who is swollen with artery disease, it is done above the skin of the loin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the incision at the ankles, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then thrust the needle underneath, and make it penetrate just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then puncture the spot which is between the two ligaments of an intramuscular vein as much as the blood flows out from it, and thus be freed from the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment that injects a potion, until the ligament heals;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat this joint injury approaching it, until it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and have two threads, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then touch the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of those threads, a double thread of a single strand.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not be strong enough, then rebury another needle under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three layers.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cauterize the abscess until the superficial parts are drained, then cauterize the superficial layer of the crust and let go what is attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a dressing made of millet in wine and oil, then apply remedies of tents and ointments until he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, how abscesses come into the arteries and veins, they come into the kidneys when they are fermented, or by too great a labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color appears like the color of bad flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is strained forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it is not like the deep flesh, but beneath the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it must be examined well from all parts, and it does not go forward or backward, nor beneath nor above, and he who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin stretch to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with a ligature, and cut into its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, hold it with an onion, and scrape it, then clean the bone and assemble the wound at the suture, and treat it until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of the large hanging lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	It never happens in the belly and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had a wound on his belly that was more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had a small root, and it was completely split, and it corroded from excessive moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I touched them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of the incision is such that you examine if the patient's humor is moist, and the color of the artifact is whitish and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in its presence with the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if you do not take it quickly, then hurry to give the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the artifact as we have said, and leave it 8 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of pus until it touches the joint, and cut through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, fear not to cover the navel simultaneously with the belly, but you can well cover half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a break in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the veins, as if it had happened in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the rupture of the skin and through the outlet of the belly, then the color of the abscess appears like the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens to various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on it with their fingers if it recedes, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct him to sit between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go within to the place that you have signed to all the spine.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then stop the majority of the abscess above all the large ulcer;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it within with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and be the nails well bound.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open the majority of the abscess extended above the nail, and you should put your index finger, and examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you take hold of the limb, if it slips away, and insert the intestine through the weakness of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you take hold of the bowel, if it takes to the navel, and in cutting off the excess flesh;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery is made opposite, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and insert nine forces of thread, and insert the nine needles inward so that you have crossed what you did in order to make it perceptible;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three layers beneath the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you take care to subtily lift it up and clean it, then heal what needs healing, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs healing, and sew up the limb.
dou chancre	because of a tumor
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the signs of a tumor, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one must eschew the cure with iron; and we say that a tumor is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when a tumor is in the limb or where it can be reached if it is like a tumor which is in the veins, and in similar limbs, and one must remove everything when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, then it does not seem to me that you should approach it, for I have never seen anyone healthy from it; nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatments, when it is in place or can be opened, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make them healthier if they show obvious fullness, then make the patient ready for the treatment by opening all parts, and pour out all the humors, and shave all the hair from all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with anything, and if the contraction of blood makes you act contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until they are healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only touched upon; and one should not touch iron for these similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "touched" by medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, as in distension and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient has great virtue, and they have no other disease but dropsy only, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should operate thusly.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the navel .iij. two fingers directly below the pubic bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it does not matter that the patient lies on the incision so the superfluous fluids do not flow towards the weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Here is the translation:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the head above is the almond, if it happens that the struments come to the water, then descend now upon the instrument; remove there the half or the third part, for if you remove more than it does not suit at that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit by the arm, either he falls into a swoon, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but remove according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the passage which is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then return the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and remove from the water a small quantity.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do it no day, and guard against fooling yourself until there remains only a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the cure of the sepulcher or sablon heats up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and take care to drink; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Here is the translation:
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, placing the head of the rod and the cope thus as the size of a pen, if it pierces in the middle, so it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is an appearance of ugly wounds; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them with a subtle onion-like application, and cover and bind all, then put on a cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is malignant, of bad color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have covered it, and the wound is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the wound that is inside first; and when it is cleansed, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the place of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come in its place, and in the surrounding area; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour which is made from the juice of green plants and of veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the blood flow is disturbed, then prepare the lunar cautery according to this method: The cauteries aid in nine dispositions together: it's known that at the disturbance of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must bore or conduct a tube from the penis, and inject into the patient; and when the skin is torn away from the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, either due to injury or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument that has a notch, so that the veins are released, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it's a severe case of designing this, then you must scrape with a spatula at the head of the penis and testicle; then separate it gently between nine, and I put a subtle drapery of linen on the tender wound in cold water, so that it doesn't become inflamed again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision with a branding iron, and with force, and all at once; if the skin was rough, it had two layers, and by chance, one would cut on top and delay that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is done from the top, it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance, the iron slips, and corrupts the vein, and many times it happens that they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with force all along the thread of the vein I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in the entire soul; but let the thread be well stretched over the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the infant think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer more than tying the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then make it slide in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it stay straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or strike, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; then anoint well with the ordure that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it beneath another lien; and hold it as you should by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and unite between the liens, then hold back the keur above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapil of glue made from a mixture of egg cooked in rose water, confectioned with oil of rose and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it can be healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be trenching, and the heads should be as large as the main equally measured.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is below the rod is inflamed, let it be so long as the apostemes are calmed, and the scabbing dries lightly; if you cut thus as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the wound with powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if you cut too deep beyond measure, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is from obstruction of stone, or from congealed blood, or from bowel, or from new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and place his feet on his back, and stretch out his belly from the upper part of the back, and hold the patient steady as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", which is of this form: and let it be made of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and let its cane be a palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the instrument, or to a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and stop the superfluity of the wool and insert it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and oil of olives and water tided;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod above towards the bowl; then insert the syringe just before the bladder, and feel the patient coming to the voided thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduit or it was twisted; then stretch the thread throughout the entire wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then it flows freely, and makes the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and recommend the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and be gentle with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilling waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the jugular veins are arranged so that the medicine can flow well through the rod without obstruction, so that moisture can be drawn out, and pushed back in when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see the medicine in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and pull out the pulling tool that is inside; if you pull the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly pull back the pulling tool inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and it is the subtle form of theclyster instrument with which one clysters the bladder: if it is so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or copper, and the instrument is higher; and below there is a .i. vein or the veins are clear; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture in which you see to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the form of a double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire; then put the head of theclyster instrument into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has come out, so that the patient feels that this moisture has now entered the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly throughout; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtlety; and it appears suddenly, and gravely hurts the patient's penis, and they often faint, and then become swollen; and many of these jumps are the foundation; and it is easy to cure children until they are 3 years old, and it is very grievous in old people, and it is as if in the middle, for those who are between youth and old age; and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a cluster, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and gently bend and move them downward, so that the foot descends to the front of the bladder, and does not rise above at all; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then touch and feel from inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten to cut into the stone now. And if it does not fall at the touch of everything, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and feel its foundation, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, anoint the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand above the loins, and with their left hand hold the skin that is beneath the loins in the part where the cutting is done; then they place the spatula-like instrument, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make an incision between what is between the loins and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left kidney; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be as wide as the foundation, and the cutting should traverse so that it is large enough to remove, and inside is constricted, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Here is the translation:
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Here is the translation:
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract the flow, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must operate, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: where they die, or the urine comes back through the bed that the kidneys cannot hold; but however you try to remove, or to break up the tangles, as much as you remove piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on a dressing of millet oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then soothe the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage just until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, rub in the oil and water very well, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then lift the wound of water and of ash and of seed, and aid it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the hips, and assemble the medicines on the skin.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the bladder is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot exit; if you cure this as I say, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a rod of iron in this form and it will be at three angled points fixed in the thigh.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and wind it around the rod beneath the bladder, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the bladder gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod with your hand in the bladder little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if soon the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the bladder. If it is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this because of any obstacle that prevents it, then tie the thread beneath the bladder and another above, then make the rod straight in the bladder between the three ligaments, then extract it out, and untie the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens at some time, the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well acquainted with herself who discovers herself as mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well acquainted with herself in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of man, because it covers more deeply, and has great fear there.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and at the points where you find it, and if you do not find it, then ask a subtle and chaste mirror; and it presents a wise and healthy life for women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command her to do in the inquiry of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to apply her finger or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she applies her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in a forming manner.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the tender spot, there where it has been misplaced, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let it be seized at the first small size.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the rule in the seizure, if you feel the stone if it grows the wound so that the stone may issue forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have roots. know the similarities to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the stone does not come out, then put on the vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone may be extracted, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as homes to aid you in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if he has no sense, and it's about the artery that is cut, so put powder on the wound and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the limbs are at rest, so return to your work, until the stone is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquous is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, where it contains the humor; and it is called "syfac", and often appears in the membrane of the humor, if one thinks that it is another humor; and it's the skin of the thigh between the white syfac that we have said; and this has not happened little.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this remedy is from a weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's a declining color to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white or swollen as we have said, the abscesses are ripe, .i. not long thus like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white sifac, if it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the internal quarter, because its form is seen before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge from what comes after the internal quarter, of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then place him on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and put much of a cloth under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the thigh near the hollow of the thighs.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the white spot where it pricks, and let your incision be entirely straight while cutting the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and carefully remove the scab according to your power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and remove all the water, and then put in your anvil, and let the white spot be above; and do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the white spot should be touched; cut out the entire or piecemeal the costal part of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the swelling subside for a while, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the joints of the heart of the joints into a single structure, and treat them like other wounds, until they are healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspensions, and remove the swelling, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equalization, then let out the blood, and put into the wounded place a soft oil rosat.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put besides another soft liniment in wine and oil, and put on the two sides, and put above double sheets, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two sheets, and fill the soft liniment with pieces of torn linen according to this resemblance and be assembled by sewing in the throat of the arm, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thigh; and another two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is medicine made with this branch of fire cautery in the length of iron, and it is that you take a subtle fire cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the sides, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the water is discovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the fire cautery in this form, and pierce it thus with fine points, and strip it to this subtle burning heat.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the cup in all the ways that you can, so that you scrape everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and worse than the operations of the butcher.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or deteriorations of blood or other things, so heal what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, so hasten perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery discharge is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining water, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if you wash the wound with water that does not let it issue out of the mouth of the wound, thus it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one drains the watery discharge of hydrops, because its form is thus before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water returns, and it is reassembled after 22 months or a year, and when it is reassembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the intestines
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in many more dispositions, because it seems to me that many things are worth leaving;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad congealments; and it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive sharpness and anguish, which is spread through bad congealments, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the bad body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are painful abscesses green and pierced, and of a faulty color, and sometimes it comes from the narrowing of an artery, or from the inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to the narrowing of an artery, it is known by the appearance of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not think that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from the inflammation of a vein is known by its appearance at the expression of tender touching with the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well perform surgery on this appearance, and on the other wounds.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then sew up the wound from top to bottom, and remove the suspension from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the wound is already sewn up with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you treat the wound and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the skin, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you remove all of this enclosure, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are accomplished, apply the poultice of mild lime oil and rose oil, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope resembling a .i. swelling, with softening of the groin,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient should be warned to cry out when it hurts;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is well and very nearly as painful as this one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will direct the work of it, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high chair, then bind them with a suspension of ropes from the ceiling to your two fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels which are near the edge, and they sting the masters, and they stretch out strongly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut to the spatula-like instrument deeply through to where the vessels are, until they are discovered;
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then I fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein is come, and tie it again to the other head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then they take the cupped hands directly, according to the length of the body, and in drawing out the corrupt humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as if it were others or an injured bowel, so that no vessel bursts which would nourish one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the Syphac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this ulcer are by the cutting that comes from Syphac, or the extension onto the belly in the region of the angles, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the cavities;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this treatment is from Syphac, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of Syphac, are that it comes gradually and slowly, in long tension, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and they are the abscesses equal just to the fontanelle, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which brings sudden severe pain at its beginning, and they are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's decay due to the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is held back, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron with fear, because he thinks of escaping from it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to reintroduce their intestine into their hand within the wound, if they can re-enter it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the conjunctions for a long distance.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the leaves of the waistband according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the scaly skin that is under the skin of the joints, so that the white scaly skin beneath becomes uncovered on all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white scaly skin that is under the skin of the vein, and between the second scaly skin,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second scaly skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white scaly skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein above all the scaly skin towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and dislocate what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you find that the intestine is wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or one with a large thread made of six threads, and sew up the rear part of the hard skin, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then stitch the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the hard skin, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two strands;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two strands, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest an abscess forms and does not heal;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the thread according to the first long thread, which is two inches of that, and after these two inches leave enough space which is beneath the heart of the joints a large finger-width;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the joints, until the vein runs, and the bud, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then mix the millstone in oil, and put it in places, and I mix the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is it cauterized with a thread as we have said, after the incision, by fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it often happens, and let the vein be so long as it chooses for itself; and if it delays in healing, so be it raised with warm water, and put on it what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done as the one who puts together the face, in such a way that you bind the veins, after cutting slightly beneath the skin.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who have an egg, until the veins heal; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No time does a rupture occur in the entrails, as we have said, and open the loins; and do not descend into the intestines to the coils, and if they descend, it is little, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always, if it stays too long at this point, the wound or syphilis will grow, until the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and it happens through the extension of the swollen vein which is like an anchor, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and inflates the limbs and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and no time is it cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then takes hold of the limb of the swollen vein according to the quantity of two fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the vein that is under the skin where it hurts, then take hold of the handle and place it on the limb appearing from the vein.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and hold the press on the fontanel of the belly, then cut the illusions appearing on the face above the straight line of the head, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head from the straight line, and do not cover a point on the face that does not extend to one eye or another, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the curvature of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cover the filaments, if it is swollen and heal the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is constricted, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within becomes mollified, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and cover the mollified skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure as for other wounds, until it is healthy, and touches the thread.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that punishments are established in our law, and for this reason I preferred not to speak of them in this book; and it is necessary to do so by .ij. methods: one is that the mirrors respond when asked, and in their cure; and another, because we often need help from punishment of some beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and cattle and other beasts. I say then that punishments are made according to .ij. methods: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in warm water, so long as the skin is mollified and pendant; then take it with your hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel them. From the punishment of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each opening with a .i. stopper, when you have well cleansed them; and leave none of the subtle subtlety of the skin and the subtle subtlety which is above the vessels; and this method of punishment is more cruel than that done by attraction, because at attraction something remains by chance in the thighs, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	and the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways as follows: one is when they appear between the thighs like the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes they obstruct the flow of urine.  And the other way is in women, and it appears on the pubic area like a rod with two ends.  And the cure for men and women is that you cauterize all the affected flesh, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for those whose urine passes through the skin of the thighs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tendonitis
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendonitis is an affected flesh on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to behold; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you treat the superfluousness of the tendonitis with your hand or with onions, and cauterize lightly; and do not apply too much pressure, lest you remove blood, then the cure of another cure until it is healthy; and at another time a boil appears at the mouth of the marrow, and the abscess, and by chance it bursts forth, and it is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". If it is necessary that you cauterize it, then as we have said about tendonitis, and the cure until it is healthy.
de erratique	of burnings
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the chest
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come to the chest, such as cancer and abscesses that pierce and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the chest, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, look how the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats or he leans, and supports himself on his back and assembles his feet as parts of the leg; and are his thighs spread out, and puts his arms beneath his knees, and binds them well with a linen thread; then sucks up the pus from the right side, and you will find the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the chest, so that afterwards it takes form; and it is necessary that when you have found this instrument, that you fix the rule first in order to know the depth of the chest, so that what enters through the instrument does not go too far and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the chest with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one feels it with the hand in a gentle manner, then you must touch the top, at the spatumile level; and when the pus is evacuated, then you must put tentes moillies in oil rose or green oil; and put the tent beneath the chest and beneath the patient's clean and neat skin so that it cures; then treat afterwards for two days of ointment, until it is healthy; and many times lift up the chest and the wound by cleaning with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristologe long, so that they are cured; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is repeated in the chest, then you must beware of burning with iron, but treat as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Here is the translation:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, if it is necessary to push upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just as knees, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps far, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump far as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a muscular poultice of lofty height, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the natural woman inwardly and remove this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have her sit in warm water up to the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened below, have her wear a girdle of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make them sit on the seat, then make them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and take a lighter hold on the belly, for the infant now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the exit of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, then you put the basin under its hands little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and be laid out on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he puts his hands little by little, and then he takes his hands on the belly, and he lifts the pillows from underneath, so that it is prepared below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he can't sit up, take his feet and move them forward, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold herself back as much as the child sits.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child who comes out with a wide hand meanwhile
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	One must skillfully return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot return it, then make the woman lift up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs in a straight form;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then manipulate the muscle that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not swell, let it sit on a stool, then study how to reintegrate the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and examine the child according to its natural shape, and make it stretch, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins are loose.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the release of the child on its neck, and it has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that you should hold its hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you will have done this, make him sit on a seat, and command that he take hold; and make him steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the secondary ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to doing this in the same manner for all the secondary ones, clear the secondary one from your finger, so that the moisture is voided;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the blow of the stick, so it is not retained, and kills the infant;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the infant inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman that she not grasp it at all times:
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be easier to handle.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Here is the translation:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live much, if they have a little name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, which should be multiplied, and are separated by the syllable which divides them, which is tied to the bud;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never do they go naturally as one beneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are grievously injured, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle remedy be applied, and make it light and gentle as it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as he values his health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	None are formed in the marrow, i.e. or ii or iii or iv or v or vi or vii, or more up to xv, and all are fully formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise and glorious sage,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is fitting that the wise man knows all this, for by chance it seems that these things have happened;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by hand operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her legs bent downwards, and her thighs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the nurse holds the tether by two fingers, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not fall under the child's bedstead;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the nurse with moist olive oil and an ointment made of aloes and fenugreek, and seed of flax, then anoint her hands with these oils and ointments;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then gently put them in the nurse's hands, then wants her to hold the onions that should be cooked for that;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that the infants are well swaddled so they descend onto their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if he touches the nails on his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is on his feet, he touches or pricks and has trouble with his sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the nail with his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend all his hand lightly, and touch the nail in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the desired thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the nail:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then set the file against another ulcer, where the third finger is in the master, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then it is set in motion equally on one side and the other, to extract the pus, and let the onions be held by the teeth, if it is in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it remains in one part, anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it does not remain at all, place this onion or higher on the joint, and do thus until it has issued forth entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be reset due to the straining,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	it is necessary that you envelop it with a bandage, so that it becomes entirely still;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then apply the cup to the joint of the sole or to the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and to the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the infant's arm is large and it is twisted in the elbow, or if it has an assembled acute angle,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	it is necessary that you place the spinal spatula between the two, and make the head straight and extract the angle.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you apply the instrument called "almidach", which is fitted with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in this way it makes the veins open naturally to a great extent;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones as if they were held by tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and the head of the shoulder is lifted with force, and it is held in place, if it be broken, as much as the moisture that is or issues from there;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot exit, then cut into the muscles by parts so you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce them as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the remedies at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strained in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and touch the belly or the thigh, as much as the humors that are there running;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are numb, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and pulls it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he puts an onion or two, and pulls them forth;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be operated on,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then it is necessary to administer moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and use soothing, softening, and moisturizing remedies.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it in a straight position, then administer what we have said about the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and one must not have power, if one treats fiercely by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, remind him of what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood comes out, it should be put in a tight bandage, and remind him of other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension the wind came into the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to great portent.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long tension, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster of attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because it seemed that the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound and inserted my hands so far that the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman felt better soon after, and immediately spat out a little bubble of air from her body;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I didn't record this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it aside.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one presses the books; and at each turning as each head of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every way, let the horns be more subtle in the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the shaft be of a certain size, and the margin of the trees be thus, and of a length of one palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the meantime the ligaments should be of the same thickness as this fist, which is closed at one end and the other, about half a palm's length or a bit more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and this thickness of ligaments is placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the corns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in its resemblance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the clamps.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it should have ligaments, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you want to open the marrow of the entire instrument, then make the woman sit on a seat, her feet pendant and legs uncovered,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two adjustments adjusted together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to the entire instrument, so that you have made the tenons equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the bile does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted above, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the miry ones have appeared to them, so much more hasty is the opening, and higher are the men because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in the childhood, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his arm, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let it burst through the skin, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If the skin does not burst, take a pot, and make a poultice or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaurie;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, are cut or put in water over the fire; then put a cane or perforated tube in the mouth of the mare, and another end in the mouth of the patient.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the tin so that the vapors come from within the mare; then it makes them expectorate, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary symptom appears quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not go away, then instruct the patient to put their left hand in a poultice of sesame or in a musculature of alto, and then apply it to the affected area.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and hold the second one; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the muscles do not snap at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pulled; if it comes out and disentangles itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the muscle is constricted there, we have described the treatment of sternum, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not all that we have said, beware that you do not foolishly pull on the traction;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the vein, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then the cleansing of the four-humor treatment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if you purge and apply it again, and comes forth foul matter; but at all costs, when it purges thus, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	It is necessary then to make fumigations convenient for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with fresh and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to make a similar thing to a candle, and place a subtle head in the nature, and large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tar until it is exhausted, and recommend another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, thus it is stopped up by subtle syrup.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	then it is necessary to apply the poultice so that it penetrates to his finger, and does not touch the surrounding area of swollen flesh, and clears the lesion so it does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until he is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not rest, then put or insert a piece of lead, and leave it there for days, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes these sudden swellings come from wounds or abscesses; it is necessary to cover that sudden swelling: if it is treated, then as we have said about the piece of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the bottom are nodulation, and larger than those that come from beneath the bottom of the body, or in the space of the two parties,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is a fistula or several; and when that nodulation is ancient, if it works, and encounters moisture, which makes the white or subtle boil,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and these fistulas are often persistent; and they are known by the fact that there is indigestion or flatulence when the patient makes indigestion, and sometimes suddenly jumps towards it.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the hip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating to the foundation, and not piercing.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is tortuosity, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from outside through digestion or flatulence, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate further; then hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or near the urinary tract, if it affects the urine, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is close to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes close to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the invention of pain inward, it is that he has bowed in, and there is no medicine that can be applied suddenly by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and the foolish doctors who intervene are useless.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then apply a tent of thread, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it at the bottom, then it is necessary that you apply your finger index.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then feel whether the thread has penetrated; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if you do not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One does not thoroughly heal all wounds, but it happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the entire hot iron is inserted into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized wounds are scorched, which resemble a bird's feather pen.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the moist wounds with burdock, as long as those wounds are open, then treat the joints with ointment, softening and soothing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is thus healthy, it's good. If he is not otherwise, he cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger that is at the foundation, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula at that which teaches the covering of the vein;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and apply beforehand to the holding, and then use the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the holding will be freed, and it will fall away; then I will show you those withered skin flakes that resemble a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you feel faint, and shorten between you and the vein, then cautery with fire or medicine is necessary.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery assembles in this way: it is to know that it counteracts the effects of bad humors, and the drying of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen limbs in bath or with broken bread, as long as the juices flow freely, and it makes the bad humors flee from the bowels.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then heal the wound of the joints suddenly inflamed with dry charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes almost to the font of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the membrane or the syphac or veins, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut almost to the bottom, or if you can put tenses and cure as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too much into depth, that you do not cope with the tenderness which holds the foundation, and come back to the sensations by way of the voluntary senses;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you will remove that covering and the bandage then, since it is held by the foundation, either by tension or by another appointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is above the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the bottom of the foundation beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she is pressed on the edge of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you touch your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it be a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no more, until the thread cuts through the flesh that is between the two, and heals;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing wound if it is deep inside, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine-like instrument that one makes for the fistula, if it is very pointed at one end and cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and not on the other side, because one should not cut where one should not cut, as you see here.
des emorroydes	of bruises
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Bruises are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut short the blood flow.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or several, and they are far from the foundation and at the end of the foundation; but those that are far away have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and they cut short either a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go into chambers, so long as the foundations issue forth, and they appear the threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and you hold it as with pincers, or you hold it at your finger, then you cut it in its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the uncle cannot hold them due to moisture, then take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of chamelot;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and stretch them to your fingers, then cut, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the vein of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said or chapter of cautery, then you heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue, then you cleanse the patient of biting and harsh cluster with water that is at the foundation, so that it can issue openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient cannot urinate, and if the thread is pulled from the bottom, then it is a light treatment;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them with your finger or nails, and grasp them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron;
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	Here is the translation:
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and it should be of a large size; and hold the thread firmly, then touch the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave it alone to correct the excessive bleeding of blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the dressing, a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the dressing, and instruct the patient that he should rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it be until it heals, and when they will be healed, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry the wounds or dressing
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens that there is a burning of fevers in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you make a point of a small lancet or a single claw which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it as long as it is swollen, just as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be healed, then recommence the rubbing more forcefully than before, so that it bleeds much and becomes scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal them as long as they are healthy.
dou fremit	two fremits
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formica is a small false appearance under the body, and it goes much deeper in.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the cold reaches the frost, and one feels it as if dead from frostbite, and it comes into all the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong thread from a voltur, and place that thread on the patient's arm, so that the circles completely encircle the arm.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the thread so that you grasp everything around the arm, and put it in the background, and strip the arm of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a frame of a cord or iron in this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, because you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, then cauterize the arm, as it is before or in a chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of tin alloy or mesh; and never make these small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore which one prepares in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cluster, small and large, is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there is a separation where the intestines should be tied, as you see, and the chest should be perceived from within; and it has one of the sides perforated, and on the other side.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the intestines be where you put the medicine in a bladder of beast or parchment, and let it be perceived all around with small perforations,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and have between each perforation a thread of space, then put in these perforations a strong twisted thread of cord or hemp, and assemble the intestines as if it were a bag;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that's the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with a gentle touch of oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then apply it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then sprinkle the ministers with his two hands together, so that it is all visible, then extract the ointment, and lift the patient's legs to the pallet.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine wants to exit, let it come out as much as it can; and if he sleeps one night completely, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the illness of decay of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to exit, then recommend it as much as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the morbid matters are at the bottom, or an abscess, so be the cluster as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the shape of the subtle cluster above where the skin should be held in constraint:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the cures of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Here is the translation:
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the laws of the body, so that it falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the appearance of an abscess: if you make it thus healthier on the cephalic side, meanwhile as blood comes from the wound, and the healing is contrary to the naval part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, a poultice of warm oil rose water treatment, or in wine steeped.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he has been burned, if you put him on some ointments, so that he may be healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword's cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tending, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it festers, and only holds for a little, if you cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as tested and roasted meat, and also like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a wounded skin, and it does not adhere to the bone, so scrape off the entire wound, and pour on water, then heal.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has formed an artery in the wound or vein, which without crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it displaced, then tie it off with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which absorbs in such a way that the wound closes up.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and subtle powder.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the poultice, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so it does not become inflamed; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time does one make a poultice of living chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the artery has moved away from the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but instead apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it throws off the pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal other wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to let them heal, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soothing, as you wash it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in warm water also,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other wounds of mine according to this method, and apply moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with thread, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then pierce or lance below the level.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and as a result blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, this is the task.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the nourishment goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and let it be for some days, then treat the wounds with ointments until they are healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek the one that is;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, seek those that you can remove, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it be disinfected and aligned with the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then make the treatment thus as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a spear or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow of a spear or dagger, and the wound is very deep, then consider whether the wound is venomous, as soon as the patient becomes weary: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not press deeply into the wound.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and relieve the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it with a strip of cloth twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if he does not come to spasm, nor bad trembling of heart and there are no signs of alteration;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal then with tents and other treatments, until he be healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if she cannot heal, and operate, then it is known that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or in the front or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, thus cure the wound, and remove foreign bodies if they are dislodged.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislodged, then let the wound putrefy, thus loosen the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds the judgments of other members are so as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and mild and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the intromission of the auspices;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is worse than the small wound that the great one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one puts back the intestines in, so one does not put them back from hot to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return again to the points,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it makes the putrid wound worse, because one puts back the intestines in their place that is theirs.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common stitches have a stitch in the belly wound,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitches of other wounds on the body and these proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more suitable with the belly wound, and I will describe each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and this thing is to reset, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is chilled, warm it up in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	wrap an esponge or a cloth in warm water and apply it gently,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you cook in warm water and sprinkle and splash,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and often make these remedies restraining, and it is necessary that they be soluted to remove the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or wine, and may it be cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by that is loosened the entry to a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument with which one gathers the blood clots;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to reduce the swelling that is the size.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we must not cut without great necessity there is;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the instruments for the wound:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut within the curve and do not dig in, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	see thou in power, for this is worth many.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part beneath the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if it is necessary that you make the patient sit up on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if you place the head and the foot higher than the lower parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the aforementioned parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	Here is the translation:
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for large wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what has been prepared for you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then put it between your hands, I mean minister gently so that you hold the entire wound in your hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it's the common manner of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you prick with a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound, I mean a thread of space, and fix a needle or it has a strong twisted thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the joints of the skin with the joints of the underlying tissue,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it penetrate to that part of the body
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join the joints of the head where the veins are assembled;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain with a double thread within the needle of the vein,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then join the joints of the wound together gradually,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let it cool down for a while, and he should stick another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then thread the wire as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease from doing so according to how you have mastered the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the whole wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the thin needles be between subtle and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the thin needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and tender skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not touch and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then touch the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I hold tight or wrap a cloth around the heads of the needles to keep them steady,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sutured;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this manner of cauterizing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it suffices to introduce a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second cauterizing is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk together at a needle or where there is a strong twisted thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you will have perceived these wounds thus: three. together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch follows the bone,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I treat a wound one of my men had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's width in size,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was deep into the intestines, well nigh .ij. palms of size,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was the wound in the midst of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine then, for it had been that way 23 hours before.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not cure with ointment, for I was standing in a place where one could not find any, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I treated it with cotton very gently many times a day, and I washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and sew up the part that is injured just up to the place where it is deeply wounded;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when she has pierced the right vein correctly, if you have placed the head of the syringe or costumed or thrust in the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make a hole in another part of the inner section up to the point of failure;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew thus as the pelletier makes the pellets,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and let the syringe flow from one part, and take it back from another, until the stitching is completely accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of cauterizing, which Galen properly described,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is like a spring, which naturally assembles the broken parts together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one head to the other head, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	fix a needle or a pointed instrument near the mirror, and make it pierce the joint just enough,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the heads of the joints swell up;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and make it pierce through the weak part just to the inner depths,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the heads of the joints swell up;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and the other through the weak part just to the inner depths, in the other joints that are swollen with mirrors that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it's the worst manner of fracture and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien says this in his book, and none of them testify to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one should cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or have a thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and knows that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is the seam more grievous than the other seams of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of the other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the arrow has moved,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	Here is the translation:
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if it has moved, set a bandage on some joint that is affected, so the wound does not swell.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and sew up the stitches, and the seam.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with the others, so that it be healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, set on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, much cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and remove it often every day so that it may be healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of other medicine in many dispositions except when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary to soften the tendon lightly in oil of tempered heat, or in oil of rose;
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or pruritus in the belly, and many times it happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they give a clusters of red wine tempered, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine that is called "fasting" cannot heal when it is wounded.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it's because of the weakness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach to its natural constitution.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar heals from the wound, it resets similarly as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it becomes old and turns to black or green, then it's necessary that you lift the black skin, which is removed from the blood that comes from it.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the joints in a position below the wound until it befits to align the extraction when the nerves are cut, and the wound is swollen.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the loose bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is relaxed, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a spear in the belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and was swollen and became fistulous, and thus he lost his digestion and windiness.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put a treatment in accordance with what I was able to do, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had a bad thing in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they direct certain experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take firm hold of large sutures, then assemble the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the sutures have covered the mouth, then place them on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it stretches its mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts the head, and this holds so that it cannot dislocate,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then set another fracture in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head sticks in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can bind the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestine thread that is very delicate,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then attach it to the head of this subtle twisted flaxen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its route.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching the intestines is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, similarly when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no ingenious remedy, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it is swollen, is commonly called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is bearded and has a hollow bowl.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the truth a hard, dry, and white nodulation, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also bearded like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear ulceration, and sometimes dense;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not clean, and there is no flesh;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	this is not done except by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, by the small passage of blood or flow;
ou por sa malice;	or through its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not let anything be born;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or where there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the juices are rotten, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where because the corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and feeble by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or at the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it reaches the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are grievous wounds, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not heal quickly up to the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you consider the view, if you take a probe of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if it seeks;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the fullness is compressed within the twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and it forms a fistula in perforated hands and you cannot search for it well by palpation,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse it through one of the perforations,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it becomes putrid;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should examine your power to know if it has bone or nerve, and it is shaved in the foreground
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and the place where they feel it
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and let the putrid flesh and rotten humors that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment so that it be healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut in deeply, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I apply soothing remedies in medicine for fever, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	as long as the medicine corrodes the surplus which is accumulated at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments on the wounds, so that they be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healthy through this, then cauterize as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not bother you in your principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let the king remove as much as the decay is entirely gone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the things that are injured in the flesh as much as it may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and render void what was before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You know that you are not a lazy doctor just until now:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover and seek as long as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	Here is the translation:
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to let nature do its work;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if it has a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the instrument is suitable for that purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if it has many bones, then remove them completely, do not leave even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if you make him contrary moisture, there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you bind and moisten and warm, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot dislodge them for an hour, then place on the wound a poultice made with rotten matter,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the pus is rotten among the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then if they have lighter bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you extract so much of the corrupted material that the blackness is completely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the body corrupted, it reaches just below the shoulder bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to open and uncover everything up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so take this example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of around 30 years, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within his body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to evacuate by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the physician, in their foolishness, operated so much that the abscess opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there were many perforations that all gathered together in a wound and moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many a mirror mirrored cure within these ten years, and there is no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and those that corrupt through the openings of a large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young boy became red, and had a citrus color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I thrust a tent in one of these perforations, and then I sought out all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupt bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines, applying them gently over a long period, and could not suppurate;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continued corruption in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and I thought about suppurating the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do as much as I grasped around a palm of the bone, and it drew to all its mole.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored the administration of medicines; and he was quickly healed and suddenly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it was no longer necessary to start the work again because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for the fear of death that I had concerning him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the evacuation of blood often happens, but it was completely healthy.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither to go nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take the bandage and bind it to the head of the bone that is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command him to extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another strap of leather which is thicker than the first strap, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the head, so that you draw out the corrupt flesh from below,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see the ulcer, so that the ulcer does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and apply a firebrand or a hot tile below the bone to cauterize the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to search how one can see and feel the corruption, and search again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if it reveals the whole flesh; then apply a firebrand below,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then the decay spreads from one part to another, and is the putrefaction of the length of the decay; for it is a small thing, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and decay spreads from one part to another.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the grasp of the hand or in the grasp of the foot, then it is very strong that thing.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but however it is necessary that you inquire about this decay, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and examine it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not contradict you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and the teeth are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the mouth,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument about which you have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and it will testify to the methods of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument about which you have mastery, according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	They burst out either because of an internal cause or because of a fever;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you will have medicated that corruption through the treatment with medicines, and it does not improve at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you must amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient is crippled by fear of death, or by wickedness, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards there is decay following the blackening, then there goes that corrosion of limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and it takes over the whole body; if you hasten to copper,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the head of the finger, thus the cope, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, thus the cope at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, thus the cope at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it is not worth mentioning the few strengths of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so then do when the corroding comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, then the head afterwards at another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and whether it comes or falls, then the whole foot is affected;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the leg, then it affects the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die of it;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of coping with or saving the limb is that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch out one minister below, and another minister above,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you detach the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then take the scoop or silk, and place a piece of linen there, so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess wound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lay the injured limb at a convenient angle, and care for it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that it had to do with a man whose foot was paralyzed:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion went first into his toe of the foot, so much that it consumed the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man sees the decay, if he hastens to cover the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the decay returns or the pain of the hand, and it comes to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put him on things rebounding after the purification of the body, and could not stop the decays;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I bound his hand, and I did not want, that I had hope of rebounding the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubt also that if he cuts his hand, it does not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he stopped from cutting his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not found it stated anywhere that because of this, one makes another treatment, so one has mastery.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	A boil sometimes comes to a head of charcoal, and stays for as long as it makes a large collection of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and the dirty juices flow, just like a vase.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is as subtle as the thin sheets of a delicate cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and it does not corrode only to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so prolonged that it reaches almost to the bone in the front, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so thin that you can see the whole core, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a delicate cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not differ due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have seen that the skin is hardened, and the decay is not in the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of clustering thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look if the ulcers are large, and the discharge that comes from them is of foul smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then the clustering of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Here is the translation:
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	as long as the medicine is red, and designates thus thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it into water and into honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cleanse the wound with it, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then extract it in sprinkling;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the chest is exhausted, and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then boil, and cleanse, until you know that the chest is well purged;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither does Egyptian medicine nor the powder of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if they are to be treated with a mixture of water and honey or if there is a little bit of litharge ground into a powder;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	where you treat it with a mixture of honey and wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you clear away what makes the flesh grow in it,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you clear away some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the small hole of the sinus is narrow, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if it widens by a finger's breadth, and inserts a tent of the Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or ointment of basilicon, so that it may be widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut and let it heal thus, so that the cane of the lancet can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if it pierces where the bow of the shoulder is above, whether it collects or further below the joint that it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is in the front, then do not let it bend downwards;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cope with the joint below, just as you have seen,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if it appears in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest place that it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	because when the bowel is perforated, they do not let it swell there
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound beneath just as you have seen,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	it appears in such a manner: that the bowel collapses gradually downward, and they leave nothing of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stand straight on the drapery of the linen that covers the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then place the forces exactly at the nipple of the breast, a little larger than the first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then adjust the bandage softly on the other drapery according to the quantity of the nipple,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the nipple of the breast to align the bandage, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days, one time;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the perforated breast, often opens the bowel,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows that which runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or a little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and takes into account whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the perforated breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	Here is the translation:
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if it changes, I give another dressing, and renew the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses are upset by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if you take subtle remedies often after a long time, do not despair of your health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because the saints are near. Because there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and it becomes indigestible that which is poured into the belly after many days, it knows that the breasts do not nourish anymore;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts take long to digest, and it is delayed, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as we know definitively, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a definite application, and they make it with rose oil, and the aroma of old wine equally in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then they concoct it and put it to use; and this same mixture makes honey cooked into a thick paste,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when definite applications are not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply glue, and spread it over the breast, and at no time does he administer an Aristolochy longer,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the celestial, which is as fine as flour of vezes and a hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is elongated, and it is not cured by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts, or in the sinews;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail, near the joint of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	where you tread, or by chance grow on other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess occurs in the foot,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and pour forth a burst as far as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it reaches the whole;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that a putrid pain comes, and it is the sign of a large wound, and the color is dark red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat them as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit them,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	you must cut away all the excess flesh that remains on the finger,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great aids if the bone is sound, and the finger is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and he approaches the flesh then, and begins to prick, and the blister.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it is necessary that you put the straight edge underneath the nail that does not touch the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the end above, and cut the subtle and delicate flesh,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply to the remaining flesh medications that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of joints so they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then scrape it, and extract fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the decayed tooth, then scrape it in the name of us, just as it has been said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment so that it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded, and bruised, and he feels great pain, it is necessary that you heal him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the corner of the spatula-shaped instrument, expertly cutting across,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the cutting does not reach just to the flesh which is under the corner, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are entirely numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is a piece where it has bones, and sometimes it has a nail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who grows in some new finger does not move himself,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and he who grows at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of one who is withered is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	he measures it at its root by a large span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Here is the translation:
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or has a curvature of the spine, it is necessary that you first correct the round flesh up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then correct the bone to a suitable joint for that, then heal until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden swellings that come together at the joints arise from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you correct the swelling, so that the joint returns to its natural shape.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two warm tents or oil-soaked cloths, so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two subtle pieces of lead, so that the joints are joined, as it is suitable.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you strike that joint as it is suitable.
Des vils	Of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	You see gross swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they especially occur in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil plant.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that they are struck, and then the black blood is drawn out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is that you open the vein, and pull out all the strength.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting should be done in this manner: raise the first leg to a warm and very hot temperature, so that the gross sinew is made subtle.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg of the patient downwards from the hip to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, with a broad incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then he lifts and draws the black blood to his hand, from one vein to the other, as much as it flows out like the virtue of the patient can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then he lies down, and instructs him to abstain from eating black bile-inducing foods;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommences the evacuation and the blood-letting when the veins are full, and annoys the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of it are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then put him in a bath, and let the limb of warm water swell as much as it becomes red, and inflates the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein at the bottom of the thigh near the knee, or in the part below the joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of that part, as much as it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then apply the rule below, so long as it is lifted from the raw skin, and then attach it to the lighter ancone.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then shape in another way following the two joints; then scrape the skin on the vein as long as it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then leave it to settle, as you have done, and attach it to another uncinate bone, as you had previously done.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then shape another size, or more if you are a master of it, then leave it, and shape it to the toe of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then burn by fire cautery up to the second joint; then strip the fat from joint to joint, until it is entirely free, then the scab.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot burn by fire cautery and lift, if you prick with a strong double-threaded needle everywhere.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and lift and burn by fire cautery, and prick from beneath, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it is entirely freed.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that it does not form a scab, for if it forms a scab, you cannot burn by fire cautery or lift, and it causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have treated it all, put on the place of the wounded limb a millennial wine and rose oil ointment; and care for it until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the twisted and crooked and bandaged together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the twisted limb is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it was subtle, it would seize the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body snakes and worms, placing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then it changes the veins, and begins to bud forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop with a piece of cloth one and a half inches up to the elbow, and the nail.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the splint stay on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if the swelling surrounds the splint, and the tumor;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and surround the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is completely removed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity or pus, and a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because that is why it is necessary to treat it little by little up to the head, and leave nothing behind in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is not at all this vein when it is treated with 5 or 10 blows of a long handle, or of 10.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one hand comes to me, from which it issued 10 blows of a long handle, and when you touch it, if you feel a bone or a perforation, and pierce just up to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	if it all issues out; and let the matter that is within be evacuated, and mix in the medicine injected through the pores without putting any more, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And not at all this vein often moves, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and many come from wounds, and where it jumps quickly; heal the wound thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From abscesses that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often has cows,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it's a small abscess that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and he feels well along the length of the limb from limb to limb, as long as it straightens the skin or where it goes, and jumps forcefully;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is affected by an abundance of certain humors, if they come forth as worms and snakes and lice and ascarides or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	perhaps returning, and destroying the eye; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot be strong except when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	it is necessary then that you lift the limb above and below with a strong, well-tightened bandage,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the tract force, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cautery with fire above, until it mortifies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, if it runs to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then cover above, and pull back;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is suitable to use the patient's purification of body by soluble medicines for the bad humidors pores,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of rotten meats that cause putridity.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and immediately after, his veins appear as if a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more stiff than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then I account for her that she turns again within the body, as if I see it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this it appears that the constricted veins are wind-swept;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I did not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and restored veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	Here is the translation:
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and burn the limb; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those who have wind in the stomach, as if making foul pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that they have large points, and small ones, and curly, and swollen.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have sharp angles, and those that have lengths, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those that fall in no member if they fall in several ways: either in a principal member it breaks,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then into no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and swells the soft tissue which is on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	Here is the translation:
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without strength from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pouch, and it bursts out also like charcoal;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is a sign that appears, if you keep to the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls or pierces, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not soft.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the sieve moves also like the poultice, and in short black blood, and cold sweats come, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	it is then without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves a bruise on the skin are that without pus flowing from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow wound reaches into the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and throws great anguish and great pain and sighs; and moves all the members of the loins.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead or belly, and it jumps into a point of feces through the intestine route, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead reaches the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcibly, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the vein is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man whose vein was cut or punctured at the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touched it, and drew it out from under the fat of the ear, and it was healed without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I drew out a vein that was cut in the fat of the eye under the skin, under the papery layer.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was removed, and one cannot reach except for the tip towards the hollow.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with a very light iron spear without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And it extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I seized the barbs, and subtle as I was, I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And he pulls out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought that he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then when it had passed xxx days, it did not change its condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out strongly, and had no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And I saw a man whose arrow fell out of his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and he keeps the arrow inside him, and does not change his natural disposition.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he remained thus, suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And it happens to a vein at the man of the prince, the king, which was injured between his nails.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was a little declining towards the right side; and it was the entire vein that was reset.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the treatment after it had been injured for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I felt it with a subtle touch, and did not hurt it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt aching and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the wounded limb a plaster made with attractive and digestive ingredients, because the limbs do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appeared to me that the limbs were affected by the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put the cautery fire in the usual place, and reopen the wound immediately, and delay thus the patient's long treatment.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he feels the arrowhead, that is, a day within his nose; and it told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put medicine on the wound, a corrosive medicine by usual means, until it was covered over.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and probed, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck to the bone;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I apply to the opening of the wound by that medicated ointment, so that the head of the arrow appears visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and passes well the limits within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I relax if the wound that I touched with the tongs, and my hand on one side and the other, and cannot issue.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make devices, until I took it with well-made tongs on that day.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as much as I trace it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will restore it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you put your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those who are present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find a new work, and a new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except according to certain manners.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	where they enter through the skin, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that jumps forth where it enters, this is an arrow entering into their flesh, and it has jumped forth many times now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump forth now, let it be until the flesh is purified around it, and the exit is eased;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for several days, and the swelling will decrease each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, one pierces everywhere with a subtle finger, as long as the eyes in every direction are enlarged, and then the treatment.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: if they do not treat it, but let it be until it is even after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes just to the eye, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not fixed properly because it was not set in the bone, and does not come out by itself.
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient stays some days without bad accidents, if the engine of the draw does well.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very fixed in and cannot come out, then I will administer tareres around, as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is replaced in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, then it seeks to have all its tension.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel, if the sensation draws to no convenient instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow;
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the wound is great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds;
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you remove the skin which is stuck with ulcers so that you can cleanse,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly take care not to break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, let it stay until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if you remove blood that does harm, then amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision near the nerve and the vein, and set in motion a device so you can safely extract the arrow without danger;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether it is hot or cold, whether firm or gentle; and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow fell on him;
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you;
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where it appears as if nothing of it is there, or the skin is inflamed in this spot if one sees or feels it somehow:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut then thus, so that the tendons can take hold, and then extract: if it bursts out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is the fault of the arrow, it is, he cuts all the fault;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it is a chest wound, and you want to administer a treatment, if he administers. It is a cutting instrument;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then cuts forcefully,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is cut, he cuts the instrument to a point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the vein is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the vein is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, so you cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract, and then sew the wound, so that is the task.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of doing so: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the instrument for extracting arrows is also similar to a bird's feather pen.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	To hollow out at the point of the arrow, thus it is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs to hollow out and to extract if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, where it has or the head 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: it is a type of wounds that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the wounds arteries that are in the temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the damaged sinews which are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the damaged veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the damaged veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and people commonly call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the vein called "fast" is composed of the cephalic and the basilic;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is located near the pubic area,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one which we bleed, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saphena vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is below the curvature of the left pouch side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphena vein which is at the junction of the right side; and the vein called "nesse" which is at the junction of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg are 3 veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient cathartics and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a vice.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the veins appear behind the ears in the same way the dependencies of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the hammers strike your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein above,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you should have two passages to traverse, and make the blood flow out as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then hold it steady and lift it, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an ancient one,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and swollen, and accustomed to opthalmia, and at the course of the bitter tears that flow from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then make a sign of inching;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then raise the heart onto the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and elevate the vein high up, and the cupping, just as you have done with other veins, and correct the flow of blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then lower the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form it firmly, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic veins for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again affected by a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the 10 veins that are in 10 vessels helps the eyes, and the tongue, and the nose, and the little finger in the oil, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is that the patients stretch their neck by twisting some ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the health, and let the healthy part of the crossing, a little bit of the long, a little bit of the broad, for there is no point of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The sanity of the vein where it doesn't get to the aque, and to strong foresight, and to facial diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as if it migrates and reddens when it comes into the face, and similarly when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the sanity is that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to his left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle flame long, and fix it in the empty space which is between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let it flow too much in depth, and make the blood flow according to necessity, then leave it a night, for it is nearly fully restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The knowledge of .ij. wounds helps with the treatment of anemia, and at the beginning of messleria, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corroding, and herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the health is such that the patient stretches his neck now one way and then another, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then let the vein of the loin be opened somewhat widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as the master is able;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another incision in the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and hold the veins together moderately;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that the patient does not strangle; and let it just until morning, so that the wound be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver is affected by gathering at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and painful nostrils and within.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lever, and examine the two veins, one of which is on the right vein and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they are recognized by this, that they are black, and by this, that around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	touch one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you touch the largest of each part, and thus make the two veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	About the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue aids after the health of the head, and it's in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the lips, and in the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the veins is such that the patient's saliva falls between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks beneath each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine one and the other, and do not go too deep in the font, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the skin which are commonly sained are sained in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where we prick all over, it is a flame-like burning, or subtle olive-like if the cuts are deep, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame-like burning is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with a scalpel showing large amounts of blood appearing, and that they contain much blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flame of olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The purification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the illnesses that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to make a gentle incision, and to beware of the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not be touching the flame, but rather cutting as if with an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it is necessary to extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no vein of it, or you feel in its place the vein within the arm: it appears manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the coping with the flame anesthetized, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to examine the place of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and cope with the vein of the flame anesthetized;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, because it is of the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	wait then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard against fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the vein is not stanched, and it fails, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the retreats; and stanch the vein.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a layer of plaster, and make it, and take one of the halves and lay it well just next to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the vein is stanched, that's good; if not, then heal it, as we have said, with powders that stanch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stanched veins are not grievously harmed in many dispositions by the small opening of the wound, and the possibility of good alignment of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein's health is in a thousand ways helpful if it draws blood from above the head and below the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the healer to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he presses too much in the wrong place, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it becomes inflamed and the health is grievously harmed, and by chance it cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and it is necessary to open many times, and if it does not open in any homes due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you loosen the instrument's joints with ease; and avoid touching the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the muscles, then they make a scar far from it.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The suture of the cephalic (head) helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to suture in pricking at the olive flame or at the mirty flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Here is the translation:
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance he inflames the eyes of some men, when it fails at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained except by preserving sanity.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the healthy vein be made in one of the three veins that are on the outer side: it is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basile.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of taking precautions in the summer, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 10 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather whenever need befalls, whether by day or night, at all hours and in every tense;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus for less than four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary to purge the intestines with a gentle clyster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much retained filth, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not heal quickly who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as they are furious or dropical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it worsens on the healthier one after passionate colic, and vomiting, and decay of the belly, and multiplying of the habit in a woman, and of travail, of watching and of juning, and this which destroys all virtue, or through some thing of the arm or of the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then refine the humors, if the blood is gross, through meats and through beverages and through medicines, if you have not the pure power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, since nothing will deflect it, to refine the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you should suck on the vein of the foot below the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you guard against that day of labor, and of pointing, and of luxury, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be joyful and happy, and let the veins be higher than those from which one bleeds, and rub the arm two or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sense;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the limbs with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then anoint the sinewy areas with a little warm oil, then place your left hand on that vein beneath the limb a little where it wants to heal;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as if they were cords in the sinewy area, and if there are those that are full of windiness;
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if one puts on the flame, if one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or near the skin, so that the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in distress, let them be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	by chance you will come across abscesses wounds; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases them;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then cauterize the very wound itself straight away;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and burn it a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eyes inflamed, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little of warm oil on it, for it alleviates the pain of the blood, and is moderated in this eye by the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the warm oil to each wound that you bleed, in order to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same process makes it triangular and bowed, when one puts it on the limb; if one subtly feels the sinew and separates it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there come big abscesses, which often occur, especially when it is not healthy enough to be cured except at the time when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten, and put on the limb a sponge moistened with water and a little hot oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for a few days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put among none of those things of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the health of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of those things we have said, for it may happen in court without an artery; but the fat .i. emplaster sec to harden the spot, then treat with another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it suits the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, so that one makes a larger wound, and so the flames are larger;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them healthier and more often, and one must heal them by cutting across, not by pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of healing is free from blood decay and nerve damage, and is worth more than a long or large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a soft poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is inflamed, then draw out three or four times the blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold complexion, then anoint in front of the health a soft poultice made from musky syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it festers at the health, after the evacuation of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to restore his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is afflicted by great pain, that he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to restore his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he is healed in twenty-four hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to heal from another part, if he must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has much blood within the body that is already heated, and brings on fever; if it is necessary to treat a great quantity, and to enlarge the opening as much as it bursts into a sweat.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you examine all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come from the palm of his hand.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not suitable when you see the arm dislocated, and you make blood flow out a second time, and the perforation is closed, so that you press firmly upon;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	not if it is curved, as he stretches the arm hastily, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be until it bleeds for the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein flows out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it on the spot where the serum was removed from the water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to bleed twice, then let it bleed in the same spot, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein at the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fingers become red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears good, then the healthy part now of the crossing, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the openings be wide, and be healthy close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot issue forth, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is so, do not reinsert the hand into cold water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger of the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	stretch the hand, and put it in cold water, until the vein becomes swollen, if you see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is across, and if you cut it all at once, do not touch anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not insert too much in the fontanel, for the nerves are beneath, separated from the flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot issue.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out the blood as much as is necessary for you, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sanity of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The sanity of the spleen is worth more than all the diseases that are under the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its sanity is that the patient's pain is relieved as if in warm water, and it pricks on the vein so much that it bursts.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and he puts it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many roots;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	sound where the finger or more large root, or at the ankle, which moves quickly.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you sound above the foot, then guard against the nerves that are below, and the sound of traversing as in copying; and so the flames anesthetize.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sans cannot issue from it, then put the foot in water, and let the vein well empty itself.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the wounds do not heal at first, recommence the second time above a little, because the joints are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus make equal the wisdom of one foot to the other;
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The joints of the sciatic vein are at the junction of the thigh, and its wound is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its wound is that the patients either bathe or strain above the thigh, and extract three drops while twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you should examine it in all ways that you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is necessary that you touch it, because the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then there is no rule about which one opens or gives a finger's width, and towards the small finger, and beware of the veins;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make a correction of the blood that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and tighten; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The signs of empyema
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or of reed, or of glass; and the ventousation is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventousation that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and the ventousation that is done by striking and by extracting blood is done in 12 ways of bodily courses,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	because one of them is all asleep in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling beneath the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling above the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cuppings of the small veins; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this, one should not be afraid to take it, as one does when bloodletting from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire or sensation of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as the body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or through habit, then let us administer it at each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each tension;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, have heavy hands;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who sigh, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to wait for three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable unless it be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this waiting period is in accordance with the health of the cephalic (head).
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not suit those who are of a cold complexation in use, or who have catarrh, because this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it is not suitable for the old man to use, nor for those who have cold heads or evil diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often uses it, becomes oblique, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obliqueness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Cupping on the neck is in place of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the stretching of the foot.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and at the fracture of the channel of the forearm, and at the tumor, and at the replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to poultice, for it holds too firmly, if there is obstruction of the bowel or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings are like ribs of the neck if they make pain in the head, and obstructions, and migrations, and strangulations, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the healthy one to express his hand in placing, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the flowing of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings beneath the mouth if they make a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Here is the translation:
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilations of the seams are worth as much as the three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the flesh is nourished by blood, and it knows of veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the back is worth as much as the remedies of the foundation, and the diseases beneath, and it is necessary for the cupping to be large, and to be of a reasonable size, so that it may be able to treat well; and if by chance, it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The blisters on the legs open widely, for they draw blood from the entire body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and reset the flowers; and are in the hands of two wise men, and of two skilled surgeons, and everywhere they restore the body after long use, and bring about improvement in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the blister is that you apply it first gently, and suck strongly at once, and apply it quickly, and remove it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the body red and swollen, and open the flow of blood; then firm, and reapply the blisters, and take heed in the disposition of the bodies, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to strike two times: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we suffice with striking only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we often recommend it; and if the patient is weak, we hasten by making a fontanel, and the end result is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is suitable for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are open, that you apply the oils of opening and dissolving apertures.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this case, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivy, of cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if it is the skin that has tender flesh and large pores, it does not need to be anointed with oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it needs to be washed after the infusion of rose water, or cold water, or water of Morella, or water of Cucurbita, or water of Porcelain, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, take away the essence of ivy, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick superfluities lift themselves with wine vinegar, or water of sage, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping treatment,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are healthy being choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is necessary to take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuce in the axle, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and avoid small peas, and flesh of a castrated animal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold temperament, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and avoid little peas, and avoid small peas and little birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he is ventilated, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three or four drops of theriac or muscat before the venesection, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot when they drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping glasses that are placed without piercing are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowel and the kidneys and the thighs, because these members cannot bear to be pierced in their veins.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not perform it often, lest you attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we set upon the shoulders when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we set ventouses on the belly and on the bowels to thin out the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and stop the pain when there is swelling or stone, if it stops by its attractive virtue through adventure the swelling, or clears the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these windinesses are administered void of blood by sucking so much; and no time are they administered together with fire, and no times full of stagnant water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	if thus in bad illnesses of fullness, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or with water where herbs of convenable have been cooked;
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping administered by fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth from the front, and it has on its side a small hole, just as if to put an needle through,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be of iron, soft in front so that it does not harm the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle in place,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin ones from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus put this veinousness on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or linen thread, and put it in the veinousness across the rod which is in the veinousness,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	It is necessary for the brightness to be at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the orifice that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and remove the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the limb as before, and you will often repeat it, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass, which is administered in diseases of the lungs, to all who are suffering, there is no vein or orifice, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb as a remedy.
et c’est li forme:	and it's the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Veins are not familiar with being in members where one cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, like lips and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the naked flesh of the skin, like fingers or toes, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet spots without roughness, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and apply a gentle poultice, as long as they are familiar with it, and have no wind in the belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be free from vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply ointments;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are swollen, and painful, see if it is the place where a cupping can be applied, apply it, for it is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place of the vein, and then of the water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and he will have healthy eyes soon after the course of the blood, if many. I wrap him in a cold wet cloth, and put it on, so that the blood is congealed;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the blood is multiple, I put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, so that it is congealed;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the eye a poultice of peas, and let them stay until they adhere to the eye, if it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more mastery, take other bloods.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the sinews do not want to take, you scrub the spot of fresh blood well, or you fix a needle so that the sanew goes out,
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then he puts them on, and soon as they feel the blood, if it hardens;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling, if you powder them with a little of aloe and of dried brookweed, or of cinders, they will cling now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror lies about this chapter, for they did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the science is strange in our land, because I did not find any good book.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except for the science from ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the experience of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I did in those three chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise men place their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when break or dislocation or twist or bruise comes to someone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing hurts them completely, just as a frail body, or infants, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the tendons are not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, it is to know cold joints, and flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat raw fish, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, so that you do not doubt about hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government that they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as if they were cooking in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and stomach of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a broken nose, representation makes sores and most quickly the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone, i.e. thick tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so that it becomes strong as it was before; and do not touch any part of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because the break of the head is different from the break of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, as when one holds a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner it has its engine, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings back to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the bones are twisted, and it appears well by palpation, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twistedness in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twistedness, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not want to move your hand, but rather apply medicines that come hereafter, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And it is necessary that the breaks that come in a fall, and are the disjoined parts, they must now be put back together evenly, so that abscesses do not come to life.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come to life, he should not leave it for a day, until the abscesses are calmed down;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it evenly in the muscles so that you can lift lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is many parts, or a hand or foot, or a small limb, or a few cords, or a cord and a hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, you reset them by all means in their proper places, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the joints of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who make them come through their work on abscessed and contracted limbs, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at rest, carefully repress the patient so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so well-aligned that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it's not at all points, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Here is the translation:
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Here is the translation:
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are large, such as thigh and leg: it is necessary to enclose with a broad and sturdy bandage, for the broad bandages embrace the entire limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the bandages are lightly wrapped, three or four times according to the limb, and hold the hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture is slightly separated.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage, and turn it again above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first rule above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the swollen veins of flax or drapery, so they are all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on top something that soothes the hot abscess, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch on your stitches, and be of a moderate size, a large cane reed or a stick made from a tree, or a palm branch, and be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the stitch which one puts on the bruise be a little thicker and larger than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it needs to fit the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it steady against the stiles just as you did at the first bandage, then tie above with a thread conveniently, just as at the first bandage on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the more tightly it is held, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are large, as I have seen the efforts of foolish people who make their bandages with twisted flax cords, and it is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that it has between each stile less than two fingers' breadth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the straining in their sound limbs, then put beneath them poultices of linen, or a piece of flesh, so that they do not become bruised.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And beware that it is not suitable to strain the stars (joints) all at once, lest the broken limbs be injured further on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not suitable to put the joints together before five or six days, or more according to the severity of the abscess which supervenes.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and you will see the manner of ancient plasterers to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of plasterers restoring breaks in many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plasterers restoring breaks and dislocations and twists: take abrasives and ladanum and enula and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrrh, in the amount of .x. 3.; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of .v. 3.; and alechil .viiij. 3.; and make into powder, and mix with abundant egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is good for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is good for twists: take myrrh and vismalve, in the amount of .x. 3.; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of .viiij. 3.; acacia .vi. 3.; Armenian bole .x. 3., and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to restore the broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of vezes, one part each; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is cold, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to restore even stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to limb restoration. Take roots of violets, and seeds of flax, balaustrum, melilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part each; and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration more than a certain amount of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and says it should be between two extremes, not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply warm dry cupping to the broken member, to restore it, with slightly hot things, like mirrors and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat lesions and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of humans, or wings of birds, and visnaga, and equalize them, and the broths, and make an emplaster with it and the lie.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is his bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it by many hours.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and loosen it, and remove the emplaster now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry, smooth cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, so that you are sure of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplastering, and do not constrict it too strongly as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled and reduced and pain and swelling are gone from everything, and you have mastery of emplastering and bandaging, then restart it, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb anything of what we have said, then do not dislocate it further than after 8 days or 12 days or 5 days or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is solidified, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh on the bone.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then hold back more than at first, and the swelling of his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb dries up more than it should, know that it cannot be nourished.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply the warm water therapy often, every time you dislocate it, and let it be so each day, and loosen a little the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	by this work, then, the nourishments are cut off from the limb, and quickly mend what the foolish mirror shows, that the limb is twisted: it's bad, and if it's a painful operation, and I don't see anything else but to soothe and open it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are determined.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are fractures that are made by percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone is broken all the way to the knee joint which is beneath the bone, just like a hatch or a fork; and for this reason this type of fracture is called "hatchure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear cuts the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a persistent bruise, which approaches just near the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a small notch, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this bruise "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is as if they were making a cast like a craftsman when they strike on the molds; so within the bone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have or had moist bones, as if they were children's bones.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it has all these ways of breaking that small pieces are disjoined as if they were like this; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks by the subtraction from them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the break, beware of these accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and ague fever, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an accidental wound, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not become corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the ailing nerve, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a ripe abscess, he is helped by what is suitable, and it is that you fill the hole with soft, milky oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the ripe abscess is appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut into the bone with skill, and it is done according to seven modes of work: one mode is that you cut with a narrow, sharp point in front, and that is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another larger cutting instrument than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second mode is that you have a number of diverse cutting instruments, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so you do not blunt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus you must administer gentle touches with tarers, not too deeply so they do not pierce beyond the bone of the whole test, and must have a margin or circle above, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each one returns to its place on the side of the bone, if you have tarers for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of tarers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put a tarer on the bone, and turn your fingers so you know that the bone is pierced; then replace the tarer elsewhere a little afterwards, and do it all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, such as forceps; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which is remaining from the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if he lingers with nothing of small bones, no nails, if the bones are lightly touched by the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is what Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this curved incision, which is its form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. rib, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently cut around the entire bone, and take good care of the membrane that is below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is numb at the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one feels no harm, and feels no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered so much by above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to clear the scales with a subtle rasp, which you must have in different quantities, to prepare each location most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its adjustment; and this is a thing that is not easily responded to by one who has placed their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is deep, it is necessary that you take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint it with oil rose, and put it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another doubled bandage of two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and oil rose, and put it on the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another string, and do not constrict it further than necessary to hold the wound in place;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be so for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is alleviated, then disperse it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of violets, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines without harshness or biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and take care that the wound is properly cleaned, so you do not leave any inflammation, nor let it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and causes the patient great harm; for when one puts on the wound something biting, it increases by gathering above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take warnings therefore, no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing better comes through the medicine that one has put on, which has virtue, if it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and glue it in a drapnel, and place it on the wound site;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound in various ways that are necessary, until it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no time are the two parts of the nose broken above, or one part by the joint, for they are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, if it does not become swollen or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the injured parties is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or index finger on the bruise, and match the break equally with your finger pointing to the indicator finger, and in the pouch by deficiency, until the finger regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the finger, and cannot be brought to the joint, it is necessary that you put it equally at the head of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do it similarly, and hasten to restore the first joint, so you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	Here is the translation:
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you set bones from one another part, it is broken; and let the tents be as large as they fill the perforations of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And say that no restorer can soften the tents in broth, and move each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white and powder of mill; then let the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time set bones in the nose with pens of egg white as tents, and if it has a soft dressing around, and holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And abscesses that come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerotate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of dyaculum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses appear, then put an emplaster made of flour of six herbs, and powder of incense, mixed with egg whites, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the broken parts with suitable instruments, then sew up the fracture, and treat things that are causing harm, and suddenly, just as suitable emplasters and ointments are applied to this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no deep wound in the nose, then treat with tente, and apply a poultice of pounded plants, so that it may be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated, and there is no point of injury outside, and the break is outside so much, and it is not broken in two, except that a little lump forms inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, to put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently feel the break inside, and steady it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated inwardly, it is necessary that you administer extension of the jaw in that part, so much that it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth are uneven, or broken, you should strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a large and well-made staple, or a piece of even and smooth leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, so dislocate it on the third day, and then put it back in place because it is changing; and apply a poultice made with powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six-months-old, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are bitter, and the patient's disposition does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or ulcers come, so manage them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous parts with suitable instruments to that end.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with a flame according to the need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there remains none, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have a task to extend further, put a round sphere of cloth or linen under the shoulder of the patient, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the force with effort, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the back, because it comes in front, it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and put underneath the shoulder a soft cushion, and bend the ministers below the shoulder, until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel the broken pieces, it is necessary that you bend over; and lift the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess flesh, take one of the incision tools that you have; but put underneath the fracture this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it seems a spoon, and it is not too narrow, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide and the other narrow, just like the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made from soft powder and egg whites, and apply light bandages on top, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of dressing on the bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandaged area, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and set the staple on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy skin, and underneath the affected skin; and the re-setting of each part, and when you see that the thread holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move above the broken bone, if you reward each day, and when the threads are loose, if it restrains;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on their back, and you place when they sleep a small pillow beneath the shoulder blade, to raise the joint high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so that bad accidents do not occur, until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less than any other remedies.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Before the shoulder breaks or becomes loose in its joint, and does not set properly except by touch; if you prepare according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered mill dust with plenty of egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double-layered cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not fastened at any point on the shoulder, attach it with linen threads, so that the strap is evenly aligned; and then bind it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day; and all the times it becomes loose, bind it again, and set the strap in its proper position, and ease the patient's side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is accomplished, you will dislodge, and be certain, for it is not a thing that sets properly lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes beforehand, and not beneath the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscess hotly.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is not always broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines beneath, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and totters, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and the sensation is not good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make them even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplasters and stoups of subtle salt, or another lighter dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it onto the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it relaxes, if it is dislocated; and if it wants to dislocate, by corrosion or by pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, if you hasten, and remove the emplaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the emplaster, and hold it as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs only comes from great blows to the back, and at the inner chest, and do not feel it except through this, because they are slippery; and one feels it well in the interrogation of the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restorers are that you put even the breaking, as it is suitable. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels great pain and prickling, just like from a blow, because the bone presses on the membrane; and it produces pointed pains, and all at once vomits a great deal of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they can administer foods that inflate the belly, to soften the fracture by breaking.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of them said that one puts ventouses on the limb, to suck out the excess matter, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the surplus fluids from the limb due to the weakness of its placement.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And one must cover the limb with a warm oil in a hot bath, and place tents between the ribs to adjust the ligature inside, then it is cured of the treatment of pleurisy, of food and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot suffer by the vein which touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then one must break into the broken rib area, and one must put an instrument to ward off the blood flow; and then one must cut into the vein, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy. And if aposteme chaus comes, then one puts warm drapels in rose oil, and puts them on the limb; and cures while the limb is healing from what needs to be cured, and applies soothing ointments on the rib area where it is needed, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to nobody, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel. Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when held firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's wound is cured, as long as one takes care to cure it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see that the feet are softened, and if the accidents are which are in their hands, and on the back there is involuntary evacuation and ejection without consent; and when one has evacuated it from their belly, it ejects without consent. And when it is evacuated from their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that it is mortally wounded: do not labor in vain in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, if you put on the spine oil of roses or oil of Mayeu, as much as it may be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, it must be covered on the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, to a suture, then cure the wound by anointing with charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the «head of the kowe», you put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on your power, then apply the emplaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it thus, and take out, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it breaks, then there is a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the parts, and comes to the patient's pain in the leg, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the break; and know what is the break and the shape of it; and if the break is at the head solely, then place equally that break, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be facilitated.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move; and apply the remedy beneath the ribs, until the binding is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come to the surface, do not touch them, so that the abscesses may be calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be held, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those which are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the methods: one of which is that you take a full fist of moderately-sized grasp, in this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the joints in their places, and lift them up high, and settle the patient on his seat; then put his broken arm on the stake, until it comes to the socket, and has a curve of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to the breakage evenly with his hands together, so that the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haunteril, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with his hands, and the others should hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold it. below the breakage, and on the breakage, and extend each of the ministrations to its part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must put. it. below the joint, and another towards the side, below the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, then you must put. it. lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the side; then set the breakage evenly, as it should be, and hold it steady, so that abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not hold it back just for seven days, and put a soft cloth in aisele and oil of rose, until the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the dressing, and hold steady on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use straight lines, and put on the breakage a straight line larger and stronger than the others, and have between each straight line two fingers of space, and let each straight line be so large that it passes over the breakage two fingers of each part; then hold steady on the straight lines, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less in a circular motion.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the positioning of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of two days, so that the swelling does not inflame and come to the place, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you address it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, do not unbind it sooner than after two days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put under the joint a plain cushion of equal height, and look at each hour of the day or night, so that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you address it by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is of primary subtlety; and when it begins to recover, let it be abundant. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be recovered in 40 days or so; and then one must unbind and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb. And if the constriction is lazy and numb, let it stay bound for a day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Here is the translation:
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fracture is broken, the restorations are light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken and joined together. If it's the small fracture that's broken solely, then it needs to be extended lightly, and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large fracture, then it needs to be stretched more forcefully; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers lower than the others, and so the patient is crossed over himself, and the cushion is placed before him higher, so the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers like a arm to the part below his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it's a break in pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no disordered part that can be grasped by the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it like the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And with the break in a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Here is the translation:
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, as prickly heat that happens to the limb, it is necessary that you apply warm water to the limb, so that the prickly heat may be alleviated; and let the limb not be tightly bandaged. And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones disunited, and similar things, if you address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take heed that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let thus some hours pass, until the nourishments can flow in, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not untie them until twenty days or so. Or meanwhile, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient be crossed, and stands straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and puts them equal with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and he puts the plaster and the stoups, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a staple according to the quantity of the blood; and it is enveloped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly, make a sphere of linen cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken hand; and then bind with a long piece of linen cloth, and let the staple be of soft skin as big as the hand, and bind, so it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind everything together around the hand, and tighten the bandage between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it is a pouch, set it equal, as it is necessary; and bind with the palm, and see if you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and bind with the healthy finger that is next; or you bind all together in a holder, which holds well, or you put on a staple, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and beware of what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face upwards, then each minister extends his bond to his equal part; and it's when the breakage is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bonds should be towards the thigh, and the other bonds below the breakage. And also if it's close to the knee, then the bonds should be above the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not form there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the book is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you bandage the fracture thus: bend a double bandage in two or three layers, and leave the surplus, then turn the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from below the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put it on the fracture thus, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft drapery to equalize the constriction, then start to tighten strongly two or three turns around the fracture; and when you go above the fracture, and there is less constriction; then take away the end of the thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and untie the sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come to the foot; and it will stay in place, so that it does not move from its place, then let it be thus, so that no abscess or swelling occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new route; and the treatment will be as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the thigh broken thus as one puts sticks, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not bother the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the pulse is restored at the same hour, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	It is known that in the gutter of the knee there is almost a break, but it often splits apart. And if it breaks, then it's only a crack, or a perforation, and it has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and this feels very good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one puts back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then put in the plaster, and you put a round stake, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; then put to each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "straight" and the other is called "fibula"; and all the same fracture comes as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the operations are all alike.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and one sees it well; and turns afterwards. Then one must make an extension, and sets it evenly, and lays the staples evenly; but however, it happens that the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be minor and lighter; and adjusts according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the foot; then wrap two linen bandages above and below, and lay them in the middle, and at this point do not allow the leg to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one will hinder the length of the leg, which is of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a cast for the break where there is a wound; and remove each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so heal until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the villa, there is no break, but the bones in the foot sometimes break and sometimes two pieces, and it does not happen that they are shattered in many dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that you have two broken bones, and you see the bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and now place your foot on the joint where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their places; then apply a plaster and bandages above, and place under the belly of the foot a small table with a plain surface, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken bones, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then place under the foot that small table I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the small table under the foot; and let it be situated above the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone one should prick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put in it as large as .i. sto; then undress the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jumps the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do seven or eight days: if the break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a string to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the string forcibly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it be sane.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, if you restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into my book. For the break signifies more dispositions in the right way of restoration: then give the donation.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the rod, when it is broken, take an eye of a bird and put it on the rod; then wrap a cloth around, and leave it eight days or nine days, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has broken with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol, and you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the uncovered skin of the heart, it is necessary that you put it in place gently with your hands, in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not appear suitable for putting in your hands, then take hold of this instrument which is made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary to grip it with three or four fingers, according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be strong and a little thick, so that it does not collapse under compression on the member during your operation, and let it be angled beforehand, and thick from the middle forward, thus.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed above the apparent bone; and it is bent once, so that it revolves, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you shape the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for this, or incision or sawing, according to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone of rough prominences and small scales.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then apply a black styptic wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put on the raw wound or anything else where oil is, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it completely around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times fools have done this, and have brought death or corrosion to the patient.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then do not put these on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, thick dressings, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, either a day or two, to anoint the wound with a bow, then remove what you had put on at all cost, and apply gentle ointments, as we have applied tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone is lightly touched.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens often, and it cannot be put back in place but repeatedly breaks the bone, because there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you treat the wound with tension, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if fistula comes to the bone, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it lightly, because often death occurs, but let it ripen for a while; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They come many times after the health of the breakage, especially when it's near the joint, and the bad thing is to see the figure of the limb; and by chance they cannot make the limbs do their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take warning then that it is fresh: if you administer medicines stippled, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and confit them with wine stippled or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the affected area in stupes, and hold it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then remove it, and restart another, until the nodations are eliminated; or you hold onto a piece of well-made plaster; because the property of plaster is that it eliminates all inflammation from the limbs; and if the nodation is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you take it to any rasp, until it is eliminated, and the cure until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of a limb which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breakage of the bone is restored, and remains after the limb is weak and subtle, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and they could not bring nourishment to the limb; or because of multiple abscesses; or because of too great movements, not in their time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and license; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great nourishment, and the rose water often tides, until the nourishment flows into the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two limbs twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone opens, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not preserve its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these works are condemned, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death; however, if the nodations and torture are fresh, then it is necessary that they be aroused by warm water, or soft mollifying herbs are applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, well done, and take the musculating of vismalve, and mix it with fat of geline or oil of sisament, and apply it thus; or take greasy figs, and crush them with fine flour of colon, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And no time is it necessary to remove the nodation by constantly and continuously rubbing with moist hands. And so adjust the movement of the limb at each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted part is wrapped and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, in subtle and gentle incision; and apply compression and attention in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now reposition the joint in its proper place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because delay causes the eyes to become inflamed, and sometimes they reset at a joint of the body; for this reason it is not suitable to move it at the hour when it is inflamed: often it brings spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	In every way, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave them, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the joints down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Here is the translation:
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through better arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the minister touches the head of the patient, and inserts his fingers like a pouch into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be firm, to set evenly; and instruct the patient to relax their jaws, and move them in every direction.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers make it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the shoulder is injured, meanwhile it is the two jawbones together, if they are affected by warm water and oil, so that they reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well, not to soften, if you put on softened draplets made of rose oil and wax, then bind lightly with many ligatures;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on their back, and their arms are steady between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor overexert themselves in any way, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what they want lightly, and do not struggle to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the jaws cannot be reset to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and severe pain come, and perhaps a solution of stomach discomfort, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a prediction; and many times the one who has it dies in 8 days.
de la forcelle	of the violence
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The violence cannot dislodge the bone from its place within the continuity of the limb and the foot, and it is often dislocated at the joint, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the splint and bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head which is towards the side of the back cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates sometimes, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate within the sinews; and often dislocate down towards the bones, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it quickly becomes numb; to those who have sufficient flesh, it becomes numb at the points, and returns to the points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens that some men have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the bone, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the axis the head of the shoulder, as if it were a single bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movement;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the axis;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is recent, or if the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the assistants lift the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers beneath the axis, and lift the joint with force upwards to the bone; and the assistants lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, then place it beneath; if it will come back into place quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	Here is the translation:
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be placed on their back, and a straight stick of equal length is put underneath the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then the doctor's fingers are placed on the stick, and the top of the patient's shoulder is lifted gently, and the doctor treats the affected hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another assistant holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will return to its proper place now, and if you see that it is reset in this manner.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is necessary that you make present a man who is stronger than the patient; and he should be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder blade underneath the patient's shoulder, and lift the shoulder high up, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another assistant treats the affected hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you reset it in another way: and it is that one fixes a long stick into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is also adjusted like a pestle, and neither too large nor too slender.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed beneath the patient, but so that the drapery is softly spread above, and the patient is lying down in a long wooden bed; then his hand should be extended downward from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a stick of two cubits and three fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place the stick of the bed with softly spread drapery, so that the bed does not touch the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and extend one's arm on the stick of the bed, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair of suitable size, and extend the hands downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however it may be, it is necessary that you put under the axle a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster made of powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the axle firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as much as the limb is comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then feed more afterwards, five or six days, and move him; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then he is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is weakened from its place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five or six days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is seized, stretched out, or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the foot and the fingers, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there is administered another treatment; and cure until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowly in movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and similarly before and behind, and the dislocation is not repeated, for one sees well and feels well; and it is alleviated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the injured limb with the healthy one, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is crooked and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that the abscesses do not come to life, for if the abscesses come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arm be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the injured limb, above and below, and put the joint together with its small pieces, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the injured limb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, strongly stretch it out; and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and tighten the two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror looks at the joint of his hand, if he anoints it with some oil to mollify the joint, then put the joint in its former shape, so that it recovers.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, put a dry plaster on with an egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it is very painful after the relocation of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when it sweats, rub the joint promptly, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, then put on a warm moist fomentation with butter, and hold it in place; if it returns to its proper disposition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easy, more so than the other joints However, it must be reset promptly, at the same hour that it dislocated, so that the limb is not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reminder is that you should put the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and direct them evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it regains shape.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in its place; then put the injured part of his hand on a table at extension and at bending.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the injured part of his hand on the table, and direct it to the appearance of the joint. If it regains shape now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then hold the swelling of abscesses gently, and let it settle thus without recommencing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further because as long as the hand is numb, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; if there is no other means of relief than to cauterize in this case, and by chance it may be worth nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then the fingers are stretched, and push the dislocation into its pouches as far as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjoined.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it go in the morning, and then make it even that day; and do not leave it, as we have said, and loosen the joint from day to day, and make it move, and reattach it; and do this frequently, until it is straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and thus you do it, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, so that it be healthy; and thus you do it, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without consent, and cannot be held back, and many times some members are softened, or the hips or the two arms or joints.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the shinbone is moved to four places; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you rewind where the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing of the entire tot.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures through grand words, where there is not much great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the worst before, nobody is healed;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straight into the ribs, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in a straight line, and have someone holding him from behind, so he does not fall;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix the stick at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the sick person's hips, and another around the thighs, and around the knees;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and a minister knows the bonds, one at the head and others at the feet, among the joints;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well fastened, the joint as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forcefully, until it strengthens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not strengthen through this cure, take a table of three long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it strengthens to its place; and if you see, make it turn with the turning device that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two splints on the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and between each splint, above and below, a hand span of length.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each splint a hole, where the turning rod passes, and the splints are firmly on the ground, so they do not move; and between each two splints have one turning splint, because the turning rod turns, and have in two turnings two small splints of a hand span of length, to turn the turning rod.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then put the bandage that is among the splints on the turning rod towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet on the other turning rod, and each of the ministers turns their turning rod to the whole bandage, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on the emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the staple of a tablet of two inches of length, that grips the place of the gouty joint and the healthy part of the spine, then bind with a bandage, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, so that it may be healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if something comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and comforting medicines, with the steel that we mentioned before; and never do they administer in a piece of a poultice,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come in the rear of the dorsal spine, and one believes that it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens, because one should not have any presumption: perhaps death may suddenly occur.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You should know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations suddenly, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iii. parties: within and below, and in front and behind; and further within there are hollows, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more the injured knee than the healthy one, and the injured one cannot bend its knee to the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limbs that are afflicted with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one to whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who has a dislocation in front, are that they stretch their leg according to the accomplishment; however, they do not bend their knee without pain, and if you try to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and retain their urine, and inflame the groin, and when they want to, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has it behind, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should recognize that dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no effective remedy; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of three kinds of dislocation, you hasten that you turn the joint, and stretch inward and outward, and move to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another ties the top of the lien;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then one must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pardedens, then it is necessary to support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the limb that is beneath the ankle, then stretch the bandage above towards the ankle, and towards the forcele;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister by the arms and embrace the large joint of the hip patient, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft lien on the two heels, and on the two knees, so that the injured leg is extended two inches more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then be suspended from the top of a pole, and be one arm's length above the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the patient, who embraces the shape of the hip, for the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the former shape, you should adjust the patient, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and extract the lien properly from the injured leg, and from the foot also.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then apply the cauterio to the head and another to the feet, then place the cauterio between the thighs of the patient in the shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have ready moist cloths around, so that they do not blister the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the doctors place equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, put on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, you must stretch out the affected leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the doctor's hand on the healthy side, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the lower part, it does not need to stretch the patient downwards, nor lift them up from the ground, but rather it needs to be as if the joint was dislocated at the lower part, just as we have said about lying on .ij. cushions;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on his face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press down on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put on the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for 2 or 3 days, then remove it, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, bind it, as before, and leave it for 2 days; then remove it, and make them walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, within, forward, and backward; and they do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as much as they can, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against theirs.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Here is the translation:
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and make the leg straight at the hip, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then remove it; and do not trouble the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The fracture is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit upright, and tighten it with a bandage, firmly above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand. Do this several times, then stretch it upwards, and bind the foot well above.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do it several times, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, restart the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strap firmly in the earth between their thighs, and wrap the drapels around, so that they do not harm the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then pull the ministers to the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that he holds it at the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch out each minister equally, and the strap is placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches it;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then set the mirrors equal to the dislocation at his hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg above, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a point, set the plaster and bandages above, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch out for the tendons that are on the back of the knee, so the ligaments are not too stretched.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligaments are swollen, hold firmly; then loosen it on the third day or on the fourth, and delay going to see the patient for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses swell up, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without exertion, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in any of the toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens up at these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it sets back in place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and it does not open at all, then put the flat of the foot on a table next to the .ij. head, then hold it firmly, and let it .iij. hours, then dislocate it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patients die.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and you should begin with calming treatments for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses may come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, then administer calming treatments for hot abscesses, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of desiccated herbs;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, then reset them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and you beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Express the rhythm of the physique
