O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is unknown throughout all, so the science is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I shall bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I shall bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because for this reason no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of members, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and rest, and the location of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name without a name is much, but with work it is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and similarly in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, he must beware lest he err and kill people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	as I have often seen many of those who involve themselves in this science, and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut away the abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck and also severed the arteries of the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Why so much blood issued out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And there was another surgeon who treated a stone from an old man's body, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	and he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And there was another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking he got a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the surgeon, full of ignorance, tied the break above the wound with rough string, and left no dressing on the wound, and let it end thus.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that it not be untied at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and it remained thus until the leg became completely inflamed and the toes came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I dislocate it so it becomes quiet and feels no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who opened up an abscess that had become inflamed and then spread through the evil of his authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless one can remove all that which is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work in which there is danger in many conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show you each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself so that the foolish speaker cannot speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take your arms in custody, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way that through God's grace you may come to salvation and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let dreadful diseases of grievous sickness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and put aside your arms that cause you to doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Take no heed of a bad disease unless you are summoned to be a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical emetics, and the chapters are arranged from head to feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of instruments, and the fixings of cautery, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and poultices and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapters are arranged and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and is ordained for the chief joints up to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore that we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of aid, and of harm, is the longest and most subtle speech, and the secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about these things many wise men spoke, and agreed with them;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I will add no more words to theirs, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cauterization helps universally all humors or bodies, except two humors:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say, hot humor without matter, and dry humor without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry humors with matter, they all agreed and said that cauterization is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that a cauterization is not good for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and that one who says the opposite says that cauterization makes great help for hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true on many occasions through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not meddle with fires except by him who has tried it and knows through long use the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the surprises and the pace of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and wet diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors assembled and agreed on cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cauterization with fire is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater virtue than cauterization by burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning medicines come from member to member by approaching, and bring to the member grievous disease of great corruption;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance the patient dies.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire due to its highness and the goodness of its substance does not burn if there is no excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this by experiment and the length of my service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is replied with fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm that happens is put away by the aid of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and likewise if the cauterization is for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think about this, dear son, as foolish people do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say so;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it's not as they think, because cauterization is not a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and its value lies more in its promptness than in its medicine, due to its virtue and the power of its operation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the disease, and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excesses are gathered in him by the consumption of meats and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at a place where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterization for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	But it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the latest in medicine, and that is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauteries are worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is said that cauteries are the latest in medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say this except for the quality of the gold and the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the heat of a cautery does not cause corruption, but this is not true for I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cauteries are worth more than iron ones, as they also said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And even when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it becomes cooled down soon.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if you heat it too much;
si font au feu;	so they become red-hot;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus it has enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use fire cauterization because we have found it to be suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the view may be more light for you to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is worth against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done due to the cause of a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of excessive dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicinal solution, moderating the head's third humor or fourth, according to what the virtues, age, and habituation of the patient can bear.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient's head return.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit cross-legged in your hands, and put his hands on his lap;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and let it come to your middle finger, so that it bleeds forth then reheat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the level marked with ink, and move your hand slowly and carefully, little by little, twisting.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand slightly, and return to the level if you see the bone just a little bit;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after that take a piece of silk, and put in an absorbent and soft cotton inside, and place it on the level, and let it be for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	then apply moistened cloth wrapped in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the scab is removed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound of the tetra-pharmaceutical, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say that when an open wound stays longer, the more it purges;
et por ce si aide mues.	and so if aided.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize as much so that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should cauterize it as slowly above, and press as hard so that the bone is made as wide as a green thread that women put in their purses so that the humors may be moved out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that, one should clean and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two manners of cauterizing do not seem to be good in all respects, except in certain men where there is a way of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by the continuous flow of natural fluids, as we witness in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing is more safe and gentle for me, and I work with that in such a way that salvation ensues.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all the head comes chronic pain and endures long, then the patient should use yellow and pills that are called "cochie", and for purging of the head, oils, and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does the fire cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the head of the patient is hot in nature, and it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize below that one that we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After, make a fire cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we have said before, and make one at the place that is called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the place where one puts poultices;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand so that you do not see all the way to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels too much greater pain in this fire cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the corner cauteries be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease spreads as far as the eye, and the head is purged by medicinal remedies, and all other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are tried, and none of it helps.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then he does the cautery by two manners, namely from medicinal agents and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery of medicinal agents is that you take a piece of aloes, remove the rind and pound it into two pieces for the shoulders, and then make an incision in the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can place the piece of aloes under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is set back, if he binds it well and tightens it so and leaves it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then loosen it and treat with butter of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on a poultice of butter as long as impetigo appears.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment with oil until he is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that these remedies which I have written or discussed concerning concomitant treatments are of no use.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery until it takes its shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clove or if it has one little hollow, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and he puts it on the painful spot, and holds his hand and turns the fire a little bit, until half of the fat that needs to be burned is burnt.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so the artery does not burn, which is outside, and abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Then put cotton on the wound, and place it on the site for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with oil until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cauterizer called "cultellare", at every point, and take care not to touch the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizers previously mentioned from medicine and fire do not work, then it is necessary to heat the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and mark a line on the weeping place of about half a digit in length, and take your hand away once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and do not bring it just to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jaw that will fall when eating, and the nerves have regard only to the falling and spasms do not come upon the patient, and beware of the disarrangement of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and also for him who does not understand, and is not skilled in this and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work remain in my way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it on the head just as we have said, and heal the wound until it is sound.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the fire cauterization that we have said in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cauterizer that has two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this fire cauterization is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from coldness and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", according to the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After piercing all around the sick ear, or around both sides where the pain holds in both, and remove one pace above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make 10 points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make any cauterization on likenesses that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this likeness of torture which moves from bloodletting and purging the head and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three fire cauterizations.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One in the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And put the cauter in the part that appears sound, and make it cauterize near the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cauter so that the middle part of the ear is burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cauter:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is like the appearance of a scalpel that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives are a little thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, as I have said before, until he is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make 4 cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	From lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	To this disease, give the patient great years and pills made from mandrake to the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After having raised the patient's head completely, and place the mustard plaster written in the treatise on emplasters on the occiput.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If he does so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healed thus, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not healed, then make three fire cauterizations inside the head from top to bottom until the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each one.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see swelling coming on, and the patient is suffering, then make one fire cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two others above the two horns, and treat it until he is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterization be that which is called "olivary", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from chill of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and all that we have previously said;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after which remove the head of the patient, then make a cauterization inside the head and on each horn, and one last and three on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it so that the most excessive burning has passed, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until he is healed, and the cauterization which is called "olivary" that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to purge the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear to suffer, make gargling and gentle mastication frequent the brain often with good meat;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king's head is put in a medium, and one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of body, on the spine of the back and of the neck, and be the olivary cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm is formed, then make those cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will purge the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After instructing the sick person;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After making a bandage of well-made linen, just like a circle, and putting it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should be crossed, and kept well from all parts;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying the poultice, and smear with old goat butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and let it be heated over tempered fire, so that the patient can bear it being applied to the wound.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After removing the circle from inside the head and letting it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that it is being cauterized by making several points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This way of cauterizing moistens the brain adequately;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on a damp cloth soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes' evil
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When evil comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that purifies the head, and watch out for all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After instructing him to sit behind his head, and having him cauterized on the head, and having two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending of the evil is together in both eyes, or in one if it is in one;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and stop all cauterization of all veins and arteries that are beneath the hair, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of shedding blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop it to the extent that you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the cautionary incision how to stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never do a cauterization or hatterail below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears of the heart
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins or below the arteries that appear on the surface of the head outside.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is cold, clammy superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of this cure, descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cautery on the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations beneath the lower jawbone.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is need for more, then he should cauterize the bleeding above the skull at each little cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears of the heart within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you apply medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three draughts of mulberry juice.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king's head, and make a cauterization in the oil pit of the cauterizer.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizations on the "clavilis" above the temples, one a little below the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and take care not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this caustic called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	Until it takes its shape.
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that you should make two cauterizations on the two temples as long as the temples are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and don't let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyelids is converted into a partition, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations in two ways.
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	it means by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let his hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your sight;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after which mark on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I place moistened cotton in egg white and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the fire cautery to its usual form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked out little by little many times, so that the colors be burned away from there.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the operation are that you see the parchment retracted and the hairs raised to the point of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the scab is removed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment as long as they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come and the parchment is softened then recommence the cautery on that same place, just as you did at first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are gone, so cauterize it as long as the paper is lifted to its natural place and is even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning cauterization of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle's leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live coal, each one a., and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly, so that it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put it on top of the paper.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness is held only in one eye, then you should operate on one, and also on both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put moistened cotton under the eye.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	et the patient's chest be in your hand and place your thumb showing above the medicine, and press it and move it all the times that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he feels biting as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting is past, then lift up the cloth, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not so, then put more medicine on the cloth or let the medicine have its effect, until your works are equal and your eyes are in order.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a moistened cotton poultice on it until the redness is gone, after treating the cloth of ointment which is called "diaphenys" and others, until he is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work so that it does not fail in the eyes of others.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then the medicine recommences on that same place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until they are healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and that is the shape of the fir cone of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to how they are constricted;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the right way be revealed to him who is ignorant of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.)
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterized according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Command the patient to place his head on your shoulder;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the ministers' head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or leave its place;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then put wet cotton in egg white or in purslane juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after burning the cautery which is thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped like a comb at the top as if it were the cautery itself;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you look, then it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you look, then it is also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but all the same, this which is shaped is useless for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and removing the purulence, and drying;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then you must work on it, and remove the pus from inside.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after put above the hot cautery and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the nose up to the eye so that your hands do not go crazy.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then repeat the fire treatment once more, and if necessary again, and let it be for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After that, apply a moist cotton poultice in butter, and the treatment of drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days have passed and it is not healed, then apply medicine with a corrosive quality until the bone is uncovered.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and read according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of doing a cautery on a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	You open a fistula and leave it open;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After that, put in the opening one subtle camomile of which there is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and fill it to the quantity of an egg-sized piece of pommade;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand with camomile firmly, and do not let the patient move until the pommade has melted into its own oil;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a damp cotton cloth over an egg white or in water:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the poultice if it does not take the place of a fistula, and the wound by marvelous sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to make a perforation in the navel, and bring the fistula back to its natural place within the navel according to what is fitting for its own location.
des crevaices en levres	(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.)
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks in lips called "fissures", and similarly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then warm a small surgical cauterizer according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it hastily into those fissures until it becomes just so;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment, the place of cerote as long as it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.)
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made a purulence and run and is enveloped and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you cure it as we have said in sections, and it does not benefit.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you make the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the boil or abscess of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron becomes cool in its presence, and then leave.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do it thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in remedies, until he is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if he is healed thus, that's good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	of movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure him with medicines and it does not work, then place the patient's head in your hand.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after apply the fire cauterization where the form will come out here after, in this manner as you put a chain on the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot hasten inside the cauterization, and hold it so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lifting your hand and restarting the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and having him hold it for an hour and a rich sweat.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are fixed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When the toothache comes from coldness, whether it is hot or cold, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and shape the end into a iron or copper spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and melt in butter, and place on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do it often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and place on the aching tooth, and then put hot iron until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery together with fire is such that you take a dog of iron or clay, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, in order that the form will come out afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be taken away that very day or the next one.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the pressure of that cautery, and then let it flow.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery wherever you want, and according to what you can.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the iron rod:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofulas are of a slimy and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion through medicines, then burn the cautery so that the form comes out, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the hot cauterize on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, place the cauterize according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put a moistened cloth in butter so that the sore is removed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, apply ointments and unguents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the gut:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moors overcome the channels of the womb, and similarly when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	afterwards, make a cauterization at the root of the throat, and take care not to come all the way up to the throat, and let it burn only a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After which, I do another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" from which we have the form beforehand.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and every illness of perturbation are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, then I do two cauterizations on the forehead in the soles.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery inside the breast between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the form previously said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, do a cauterization that pierces all the cauterization which is called "point" from which the form is before in the illness of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be just up to thirty, or around that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing according to what is said above, and having the fire cauterization at three rings according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are the cauterers lighter, because you make them in triplicate.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	(unchanged translation from earlier)
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then instruct the patient to lie on his back and on his side.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after lift the kerf that is inside the tittle of the doves with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the cautery which has two needle-like things in this form.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the kerf as far as it can be pierced to the side, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and because of this it is made a cautery with the cautery that has three needles, therefore the figure of cauterization has six cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And once is added to that one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After this put on the fire cautery powdered with ceruse.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After this make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little good happens then, so make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized skull, or many cauterizations in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, and they trouble his complexion, and there are many cathartics for him, and he is accustomed to the usual cures but does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his back, stretches out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then make three cauterizations below the ribcage to the quantity of an egg, with all the cautery sharp, and two cauterizations outside the two sides until the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they will give forth pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterizations be so deep that they penetrate the two parts of the skin, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see it necessary to cauterize a large one in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever has fear of this cautery, cauterize it in piercing and sign on the stomach at one point according to the quantity you see fit.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then the cauterizer performs the entire fire cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the wound that we had before, until he be healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When pain comes to the liver from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is greatly removed from its natural composition by superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated as we have said in sections, and it does not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be purged on his liver;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and mark three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the ribs, where the man's flank comes;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and have a space of about an inch between each cauterization;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterizations be on the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your whole hand at each cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it burn only half as long as the key, and have the patient stand straight on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then he must kneel, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, then burn the cauterizing fires with a knife, being subtle and skilled in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the flesh, for you would dry out the entire body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it come just to boiling, for the blood is very subtle thereabout, and you know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels no more than moderate pain;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the capsule, then he feels excessive pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then when this treatment was for mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back on a pillow;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign over the site where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, because this is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize the cautery so long as the coals are burned, and come to just short of bursting, so that the burning is all gone.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until he is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it does not behoove anyone to use this cautery except someone who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these illnesses have been cured on some occasions.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	He can work boldly, and it seems to me that it is better to leave them.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cauterizing for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old ones said that one should make plural cauterizations of aristolochic roots, and in such a manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristolochic, as long as you can find, and be dry, and also as thick and as long as your thumb;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and the moill in oil, and the emprens to fire, and cauterize the cautery between the forcele and low col, and two little cauterizes a bit down in the part that is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two little cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a bit behind;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cauterizer in the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two on the ribs of the breast after the cauterizer that is between two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but make it open freely just as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that any old person uses the fire cauter to make it look like a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and the heat relieves the pain, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear for the patient who dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said about the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which one manner is that you make three cauterizations, or four, according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver caustic that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand all over the cauterization, and let the patient be aware of what's happening on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cauterization is that you scrape the caustic which has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the key that is near the mouse, or where the patient's skin comes towards the left side, and be the elevations which you lift with the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After that, place the two edges inflamed so that the key is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cauterization, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, then cauterize the entire fire cautery to three nurses.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when he has got a purpuration by long time, and this is like the others of the cures said before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not good for dropsy, unless it is done in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterizations be well-nigh the spleen of good cheer.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to allow purging for a long time, and do not cease the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the nail that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and he who has an olive-shaped back, according to what is mentioned here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the pines
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and are full of yellowish pus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the wrist bone and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn back.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in, thus the yellow water would burst forth, and the cauterize should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the thumb bone;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauters be long, one under the knee in front and the other behind on the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauters open for a long time until the pus issues forth;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the healing of the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a flux of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vital and digestive forces that are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, so make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been said here before or stomach cauterization, to circulate cauterization.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauterizations around the mouth subtle for every cauterization is subtle, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abounding and the patient suffering, then make one cauterization on the navel, and one cauterization on each rib, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are ancient and are of thick cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, so make cauterizations.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three on the back of the spine, that one which is entirely below the almond-shaped node and node in a triangular way, and one cauterization under the mouth two days.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one makes a large cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for all the subtle cauterizations.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment let it rest until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the swelling which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut at the elbow, if the cautery appears to be red and raw, then put it all afire on the elbow that is being coped.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand stay there until the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not cut.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much elbow, then cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the cures of ointments, using them until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the head, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of an ill-cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When someone has a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharges foul-smelling pus and corrupted moisture, then you must carefully examine the entire tent (fold) to its deepest part.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After it appears red and raw, put the cautery in the fistula according to the quantity that the tumor has entered, and restart the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of the need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of burning the nerve which are inflamed, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the bladder and intestine, then beware of these places, and do not make fires except in a well-enclosed space, and think that it is not a danger;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after the cure has been done as long as it is necessary, and if the wound is scaled over and the matter is removed after a long time, then you should know that the wound is entirely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is putrid, and corrupts the bone to the foundation;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as one of those which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	From the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain of cold comes to the ribs, and great windiness, and does not take shape like a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on both sides of the ribs at the cauterized clave, as we have said before;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we were to cauterize it in the middle, there would be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then one makes a cauterization on the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the scrotum begin, and there are two on the right side and two on the left side, and each should be as long as a nose's length.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and one makes another cauterization behind the back, where you have need of it;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and the cauterizations should be shaped like a key according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the menses are cold and moist, and do not cease for this reason to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, it causes great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Then it is necessary to make three fire cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two fire cauterizations behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauterizations be nail-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the intestines
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the hollow of the hip, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the navel is in the departing place of the abdomen, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hollow of the hip with one cauterization resembling a circle, and sign before the navel around the hollow as it turns, so that the hollow be inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cauterizations be such as those which we have cauterized on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present, then do three cauteries of the olive-sized ones, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the keys.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and take care until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the intestines
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the groin of the hip, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured from what we have said in the section on boils, and the care does not work, and the illness is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills similar to these.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterward do a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	namely, hot medicines together, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cauterization is according to many ways, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	That you cauterize on the back of the heel three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and great, and have between each cautery a space the width of two fingers, and be the cauteries olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never has anyone done a cauterization in mid-heal on the top of the heel, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, then make a cauterization at the circular cauterery that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the heel.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the heel, and all the splinters of the nail are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And it is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach as far as the hip or as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the hip and leg, make two cauterizations on the side where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one above the ankle four finger widths to the left.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauterizing scalpel be, and let the thickness of the iron burn.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two toes or almost to the knee, then he should cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	and if it is necessary, and it makes him even more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he sees that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterizing scalpel or circular one, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cauterizer so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great discomfort and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and let them be until the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purgation of the belly from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say in the cauterization of the groin, this is the manner: make it thus and be as thick at the head as a navillon of date, or a little less, and be between the interstices, and be from one interstice to another of the length of an elder's thumb.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the ligaments be like two parts, and also as if they were nails, and it has one band of iron well made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the boil of the patient's haunch, and let it turn on the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let the cauterizer do one fire once the cauterization is done, and let it leave for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make an ointment with butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery for the fear of its glance, and if we see not what is being used;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet these are good cauterizers, who can bear it, and where it affects.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of burning medicine is that you make an instrument with interstices where the edges of the door descend, and it be of earth or iron to a length of one span, and in its height have two notches, and between each notch the quantity of the thickness of a hen.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be open on top and bottom, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After put the handle of the haunch on the patient lying on a pig's side, and then place your hand above the handle of the haunch.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pour the hot water between the two circles of the ewe that has been heated by fire in a pot, and let it stay for an hour or ten, and allow the patient to suffer from heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it also finds a cauterization like fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the ulcers are gone, raise your hand with the instrument and lift up the cloth of sweet oil, and let it be so for three days, and put on butter until what is black from scarring is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three days that purulence may issue;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument hold oil according to what you have done in the correct manner;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of hot oil, and I have written it or treated it as a chapter on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot water, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put one pot on top of another well-weighted, and put on alum, charcoal, and sweet oil on top, until there are two layers above the powders then you will have it well prepared in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave him thus until he descends with an ague and fever or falls into a swoon, then take all that sweat and pour it on stones and on alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then if it will be much feverish and is administered in motion of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes an aching work like fire, and if there are other medicines which one cauterizes well on the skin thus as thesis, and honey mixed with anacardium and stones with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment by which one man was cured of the pain in his haunch and sciatic vein, and he greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he became well only once when this treatment was made, and he bathed himself just as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And then in this manner you take green and fresh lardaric, and crush it much with a little bit of grease, and put it on the skin and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and then make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery on such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dyscrates says that when the varicose vein is cauterized with goat's gall, it helps a lot.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called a fleshy fold.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Then take dried goat's gall, and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and let it stay until it is extinguished.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do so again, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it will come up to the groin, and that the pain is ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cauterization is called "goat's gall cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses is worth a cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after this that the patient be freed from fetid pills or similar things, and one should apply it to the back, there where the pain stays, three lines marked out, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauterization be done according to the cauterization which is called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the middle of the shoulder according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a thin, pale face when they wake up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find it in the lower back of the spine and on the appearance that comes over other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So the limb must be equally red throughout the cauterization.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a fire cautery two or three lines away from each other, and have the points close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, keep the wound so long as it is healing according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in a hollow spot which is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the majority of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need, then prick on the surface of the foot, so that the fire cautery claims "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each knee three or four times in each part, for all the olive-shaped cautery.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, then do it again, but don't keep your hand away from the fire's heat until the spark has burned out.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, administer the fire cautery that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the knuckle two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains a point of pain on the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come to the shoulders or the back, then cauterize each part and take good care of the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the roughness of the scurf.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When flux comes to the groin, and the bellies descend to the testicles and it is new, then it is necessary that when you see them cured, do not make him eat at all that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and he uses things that bring a stinking smell to his belly, so that the devil descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after he has sat on his back between your hands, and tells him to hold his elbow so that the swelling is repaired, and tighten them to your two arms, and draw down below the rash on the bone of the finger, and all in a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the fire cauterize which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is white and gives signs.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then tighten the swellings to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the attendants hold his hand so that he does not return backward;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the groins of the patient, and put underneath him the cushion and the servant on the groins, and another above the breast which holds his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the sign with your entire hand, and hold it straight and steady until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue again as many times as necessary to reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and watch carefully that the blister does not burst when you are doing the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you don't burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so the patient does not die or suffer another ill.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that children's cauterizations be subtle according to their size, and for great people also great according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days' cure, apply the grease of butter to the site of the cautery until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the cure of other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nails are left to grow long, so that the bowels do not protrude when he will want to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, let him be given a bandage well made, and wear it for 40 more days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he does not labor too much and beware of too great drinking and eating, and too high bragging;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he has followed this instruction, then he is entirely well.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say next about the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	from the itch of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make a fire cauterization on the cauterized part according to its size, and let it be burned to the third degree of heat;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize at the fire cautery to three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the first sign at the beginning and make a line on the width above the ulcer, and another below it, and draw your hand through all the cautery with a nail.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and moody.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that he be cauterized at the cautery which is called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, and virtue, and its location of torments and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is sound after the first cautery, it is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	since then, start another cautery on top of that one; for it is custom that the member that is nearest should change, and therefore you must make the cauterizations until the patient is sound.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The humors are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can't you see it being cauterized, take heed if the patient is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption may overwhelm the entire patient, then make five cauterizations on top of the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I pierce to the forehead, and the other at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two above the two horns, and one behind above the haterel;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand be so free that the fire comes to just above the bone, and as long as the scales come out so that the vapors of the great humors can come out;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the swelling is spread out everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is manifestly wasted, so you should apply the cauterizing of these fire cauterizations that we have said on the head, and one cautery on the nape, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the coccyx and another nearby, and two above the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two above the sides, and two above the tendons of the breast, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the back lower leg, so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when I make more cauterization, it brings more help, and multiplies the benefit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already all corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated by medications and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the quarter.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes one makes a cauterization at the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is removed, the swelling remains.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and anyway no one intervenes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is worthless, then cauterize it with a cautery deep enough, according to the quantity of the humor, until the swelling is removed, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then mix flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of crane, each in equal parts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix it all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for chancres by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you want to arrest it, so cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the perimeter of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And wise people say that one makes a fire cauterization also in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and anyway it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen some times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cauterization called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it tarries to die or due to the superfluity that it makes or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or due to the weather;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it around with many small cauterizations, piercing;
aprés le laisse ensi.	After that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to kill.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with whatever is on hand:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterizations have pierced the core, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in this manner as if the course of the disease were alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards cure him until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure for fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a wasting away of member, for it wastes away the members just as fire consumes dry straw.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can suffer from fire cautery together, then arrange the cauteries with small and great nails, according to what is needed at the location where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	Afterward, cauterize all around until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas a poultice made with oil as long as the burns of fire are removed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the ointment treatment has generated flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that sound flesh does not arise, then it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted flesh.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this remedy is sometimes used in place of fire cautery due to medicine's agreement in that location;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicinal water in its division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take what you have need of.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on the feet by default a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large gap that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the fire cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	To know it is by fire cauterization and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is such that you should heat the iron like a blacksmith's pen, and make it of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and have subtle margins.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After put all heat on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And leave it thus for three days until it begins to show purulence.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild mulberries pounded with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be detached from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with oil, anointing it as much as is needed until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by outward signs on the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply water cauterization.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a brick of earth or iron, or a pin of wood, and place it on the nail and the other one, that is to say for small warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the brick on it so that it surrounds everything, then put a little bit of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you go so that the edge of the brick comes to the root of the nail, and then the hot water can find its way deep down to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it so, and it will uproot itself entirely down to all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So treat one after another, until you have reached all those within the body, then cure the humors which cause flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some shiver from cold or numbness, or from quartan fever or another, then it is necessary that you make him have 4 cauterizations or 5 on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and with fire cautery or weights, and on the stomach for olive oil cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	so let it shake, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul-smelling boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear on the outside of the body, or foul-smelling blisters, that come from great corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if necessary at first when they appear that one does fire cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, by which the point is seized with fire, or a long Aristolochia root, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And whenever one cauterizes at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow forward anymore, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often there occur great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the afterdeath, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a member, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very grievous thing to restrain.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet whenever this happens to someone, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it hard until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more drips out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then set the olive oil cautery on fire with multiple small and large ones until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is running, and put it on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to make those one after another until the blood is stopped.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you don't burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when a vein does not flow from the artery, one cannot well sustain oneself even when the artery is great, if it is not by one of the four ways that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or through burning, or by extracting it when not well treated, or by a strong bandage of thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to constrict blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be tied and steadied accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the stanching of blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting burning things on, or similar things, unless it is not effective.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, then one should place the tip of their index finger on the wound in the vein as we said, and stretch it well until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until it is very cold so that the blood is frozen and thickened and constricted.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand as to those things which he needs for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	There begins the second book of surgical cures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all about every disease in which it is necessary to apply fire cautery or hot medicine, and the reasons, causes, and instruments of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have put the first chapter at the beginning, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way, so that one may find more easily what one desires.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, dear son, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to be more cautious.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to take a foolish risk.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come into cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	Those who come from such people have so identified with their illness that they would die easily because of the desperation they find in their illness, and the magnitude of their wickedness.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And one should be afraid of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And from those who give you their opinion and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your avarice, and do not foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and can gain control of.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognostication and indication in the treatments of your illnesses, so that salvation may be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and remembrance in praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have concluded this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have divided from the head to the end, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	of the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this sickness often comes to children during childbirth, and when the nurse holds the child's head too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a known cause that one is unaware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this sickness except in children, and all the ones that I have seen died soon.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for that reason it seems to me that it is worth proceeding slowly with this work in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw one child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer be sustained.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture became so great that it was dead, and this moisture is gathered below the bone on top of the shoulder blade, between the vertebrae and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the work is such that if the moisture is between the vertebrae and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you cut a wide incision into the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it grow as long as two of us, until the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see to the form of the spatula-like thing;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that each part of the head has its commissures open, and when you press it with your hand from inside, the water jumps forth quickly, and this does not respond to you;
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	so it is necessary that you cut three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After binding the incisions with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it thus for five days;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then loosen it, and treat the wound with tents and anointing, and let the head dry off, and then feed the patient dried meat mixed with moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another manner of incision is to look where the size of the abscess opens up, and the joining of water.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then where the abscess opens up, and the filling of water, and do what you can with it.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you don't cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and then comes forth blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheum (or discharge)
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is fire cauterization with which one will sear both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, when you see them cut open, that the patient make ready his head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the area with an asperous cloth until the arteries appear, then take away the patient's neck from the entire cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and the pulsations of one and the other are after the ears, and they are responded.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the pulses of both, then cut one and the other with a sharp knife two inches apart, as far as the vein reaches to the bone, and let it be by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in two like a pair of scissors across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space three fingers deep, then mark with an incision and cut to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and as much blood is to be let out if it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone point of the suprachondrium, then cut so that abscesses do not come there, then stop the wound and bind, and the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and acute cataract, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and old forgotten habits and similar things, and he has been treated by methods of medical cures and all this does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes sure the hairs on his temples are well-retracted, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well and can be felt apart from some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is felt, the patient should loosen his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and rise up in hot water until the artery becomes manifestly apparent.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula whose shape is as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then grasp it at the top with tweezers, and part the veins that are below each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the unguent, and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two veins.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For she is not cut, so does not flow all the blood at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And take out six cups of blood, down to three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, then it's necessary that you tie it in two loops with a strong double thread of silk, so that no bleeding occurs before the wound heals, and a decrease in blood comes.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then remove the excess that is between the two loops at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, apply the fire cautery with a cutlery knife just to the bone until the joints are cleared.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and that is the mother's work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterizing is helpful in finishing moles:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	therefore it is of greater help to moles.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when you loosen them, take care with dry medicines that bring forth flesh, and of poultices, until they are healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if there is no stoppage in the artery as long as you are working on it, then hasten to close with cautery, or use the location of vitriol and strain it to your hand that the blood be stopped.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you don't have that available, then put it on the wound so that the blood is frozen, and apply the location of cold water until the bleeding ceases, and strain it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more suitable and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cauterizing instrument cutting into two parts, but the cutting parts should be well spaced so as to withstand their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cuttings are too dense, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be a large gap between the two knives, and then when you have signed off on the two holes, and you place the hot iron on top so that it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein into two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be separated between the two shoulders because they are not joined together with this fire cautery at all.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When tears are flowing from the eyes that are above the forehead of the head of hair, and there is no profit at all from medicine being applied to it, and you see the patient's face growing red, and feels the forehead burning as if it trembles;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if the skin is tender and moist so that the hairs of paper are fallen, and the papers are scorched and burned by the heat of tears, then there is need for this care.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contused cure", and that is to make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, in equal parts according to the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and be one of the cuts like two going all around in front, and the others go up to the ribs above the papers, and take care of incising the arteries that are on either side above the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jawbones, and be each wound the size of three fingers across the joint;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to absorb the blood, then pour the vinegar solution through two parts where this is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is below the temple just to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape off all the keratin that is between the two cuts up to the furrow on the bone, then do the other part from the middle incision just to the other second, and then draw out this vinegar solution.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	So insert into the first cut the instrument called "culterelle", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and soft on the other side, not sharp at all, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife cutting towards the fatty part of the shoulder blade, and the knife soaping towards the bone, and push it in as far as it comes to the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And tie all the bandages that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous right up to where the key opens, and then make another cut in the middle slit right up to the other edge.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw out equal blood, and express the place by the taken blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put a cloth made of old cotton in each slit, and put wet cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and ashes on top, and make sure that no abscesses form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great plenty of cold water, then apply a balm of basilicum with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When anyone comes with a long-standing catarrh accustomed to it, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakening the sight, and burned papers.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and the head is filled with a deep pain, and the patient is worn out;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you should know by these accidents that those materials and the cautery do not come forth except from many veins, and the mother cares for what is there, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great gash in the forehead and another of considerable width inside.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin at the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and withdraw your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two lips of the incision a piece of old cotton cloth, and tie it with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind it above with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot apostemes;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, then you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to form, and then treat it with things that excite flesh, which makes it grow.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of saffron, and make a plaster.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds in order to expel all sorts of corruption.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beasts, or a piece of mining iron, or similar things like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as jasmine, vetches, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things like water and soft mud and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it pierces the ear or in some other way does not fit at all with the ear and does not grow in the ear, then place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if it yields any drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make it stink with conditions, and stop his nostrils when the stinking comes, and put around his ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and it stands above the ear.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times harm comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come harm, then provide extraction with fine forceps, of which the shape is this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out from the forceps, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then provide extraction with a fine needle of small double edge;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not jump out through that, then make a rope of linen and insert the end of the rope or the hole of the ear strongly, and stop what is around the rope with wax so that the blood cannot enter with the rope;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then pull it out forcefully, because many times harm comes from this as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if harm does not come in that manner, then take some glue of which it takes the birds, and put in some instrument that is sharp for this to do, and wrap a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and make it stick.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if she doesn't burst forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut off the ear before the abscess comes forth and spasms.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of cutting is that you first let the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract the blood according to its natural flow, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fatty or bony area.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the incision as round as a moon, until you come to the stone, then scrape it according to your power, and quickly suck out the bone.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains within and they swell, then administer an extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if he cannot come out, so administer a spoonful of subtle medicine according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that lump.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do it when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have cut it into many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with subtle forceps and a sucker, just as we said, so that the extraction is easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use condimental sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be steady above that ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps forth because of that, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, then take many pieces according to the length of your should be thin and light, and heat them slightly in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put one or two holes in the patient's ear, and lift up from below with his fingers from the other side, and strike with another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to pile stone upon stone until the water flows out entirely, and thus it will flow entirely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, then take a vine, and put one end in the ear, and wrap the other end around it with fire until the thickest part of the vine is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do the same to other vines until the water flows out entirely, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small, like a hedgehog and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large enough to be felt, perform an extraction by forceps;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of earwigs from ears, when you have cured it as we have said in the division and in treating with distilled things, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear to the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no wound is apparent, then treat with subtle tweezers, and if not, take the cord of which the form is there:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then pull strongly on the whole cord;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, then wrap cotton around the cord as I said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not emerge as we said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat on the distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which the form is there as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And it is of silver or lead a large vessel below to small holes, and above over for distilling.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation with the instrument of lead well-made for that, and if you see take the razor and envelop it around the pointed cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour out your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the pipe, and the pipe be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put everything inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or dripped out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient will sense it inside, and let the distillation be placed over a pot warmed by fire so that it can be distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without a single perforation in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men through the bursting of a wound or a piece of bone within the ear, and these bursting things sometimes go all the way into the ear so that one can no longer see;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes it happens that the perforation is very large and one sees very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Then the one that goes all the way in, if one cannot see it, is for serious healing and many preparations; and as for the one that one sees, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opacity appearing, then the work is complete in all this space that is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be gentle and careful on both sides, before and behind, so that it does not hurt the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the opilation is of a new-born bone or the flesh of the ear, so hold it with fine pincers and cut it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is done perfectly in the ear, then take a subtle and light rasor and heat it slightly by the fire, then put it in the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you sense the opilation from which the patient feels grief to hear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian pitch.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with red water, and powder on vitriol brews;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put on another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him until he is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is a discharge of blood, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	These leaves that come from the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you should stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off a spatula of its roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then place it on the glassy boil.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not blister, then cauterize with a subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the cauterizing after the incision is good.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times repair, until nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the Hellebore
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come leaves from the eyes that seem like hoarhound in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the gravel (or stone) moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the wound then wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with forceps and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing a little bit of the paper, it will not trouble the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is great, then sew it up with a stitch and care for it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply force, because the swelling will restore it soon and produce flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn it over with the paper, take hold of the stone with forceps, and cut and press it from one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is displaced by incision, this does not matter;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the wound is cut, let flow a salted water of aqua, and care for the place where the flesh is injured until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that is injected into the sheets of paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts them a lot, and they come to the catharist at dawn, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and therefore they lie down on their faces soon, and sleep above, and have their papers beneath their eyelids moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the lid at your elbows and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the way of the work is that the patient puts his head on the same side;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then put it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press it with your hands on both sides, so that the contents are assembled within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture a groove about as wide as the incision one makes when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin so deeply that you come to the contents;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in several dispositions the contents come out of the groove, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	then take it out in one piece of cloth wrapped between your hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and guard that you do not insert into the wound, so as to reach all the way to the eye, so as to cause damage.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the scalpel does not open in the beginning of the wound, so then slightly widen the wound a little until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then pull it as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water, and place on the wound, and strain with bindings.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who burn their gauze and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let them take care until they are healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the hot joint, then treat it with poultices soothing until they are healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When other hairs grow than those that are natural, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and cause to come forth habits of diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and pimples, so that it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and this is the cure according to four manners:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cautery together, or by medication according to what is written in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by threads, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If she has changed, it is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then put a needle on all the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and be this on the edge of the paper where the hairs grow below these hairs, and treat the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the adjusted hairs, all along the spatula's edge, from the great tear to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull out the thread and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then sign on the paper an image of enema, like the branch of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see unfolding the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if someone has need, they cut off a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then fill all the spatula up above the two lines that you have signed, and start with great largesse just a little.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the knife into one of the two corners of the key, then scrape all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips with a stitch of an needle at all the thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the excess threads above the two knots at all gluing things, if you see making this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then don't bother, and leave the stitch and threads just for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without stitches of things drying and constraining, for the paper comes to life at the closing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is bitter (as they said in olden times), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at three uncials severed according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you have no power to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and pass it through the shape;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and pass the other thread alongside the great gutter, and the second thread alongside the small one, and tie them together equally between your two threads;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have counted, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with ointment and similar balm calming;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hair of the parchment is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if it is necessary that you use what we have said about cutting;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the cut in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of cankers is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you convert the parchment and make an incision within according to what I have said, then make two cankers by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula are;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the parchment of oil, and strain the two cankers from the two parts together;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and turn black and hard, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If he delays, if he needs medical attention, then cure him until he is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is closed, and the paper (presumably a dressing) has been lifted away, and the hairs can no longer prick.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert a soft and fine silk thread into it.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then tie the knots together and tie one to the other gently, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the chase the other fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be done in the sun so that the work is revealed, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle into the whole length of the chase at the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly as you pull it up over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the chase, and push that hair into the chase if there is one, two, three, or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull out your hand so that the hairs grow forth all over the chase on paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not grow forth with it, then pull out the chase downwards to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase grows forth from the pore above and you can see it by the sight of the eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then pull out the chase and the thread, and let it rest for two days or three, until the hair grows back in its place and the scar forms above.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from natural beards, and raise it up with that one you leave behind, until they are elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the corruption of the oil.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this sickness called "aleacrati" comes to the eye, so there are two ways in it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or an incision, or a burning, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of working on it is that you cut open the suturing, and divide the lips of it, and put inside linen cloths, and tie it until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, then the disease comes back worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but your work with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and rose water or althea and flaxseed are cooked, and oil of yarrow melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and cures those.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your care is that you take heed to ensure it does not break apart according to its former form;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these works that we have said are not far from the remedies of this disease, that it may recover according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh which comes into the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is below and is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and gash and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work is that you take a needle with double thread, and thrust it into the flesh, and make it pierce from left to right, so that the threads may come out on both sides of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then cut away the flesh above the needle, and make it split apart at the spatula's broad edge.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then take the razor and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or on the inside of the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and be the corners of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter that has no "I Grecs";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges is worn down underneath, from what follows the paper, then join the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment for this that we have said about softening medicines and tents until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or an opening or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a smooth incision underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what is mentioned before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then dislocate between the two boards of a tent, as I said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine to do all they can to bring back the figure to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what it is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this swelling occurs in such a way that the paper above is stuck with oil white and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch with pincers, until you extract what is stuck in the subtle sputum, which should not be too rough nor too cutting, lest the patient cannot endure that the sputum too rough nor injures the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision, from which you cut away that assembled part, be slight so that the paper returns to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and let all that assembled part be healed, and make no incision in the salty eye water, nor raise the sweet water, nor cause inflammation.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put a linen cloth between the paper and the eye, and place on the eye a moistened woolen cloth in abundance of egg white.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days use cooling remedies and things that soothe until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the grime of the oil.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the ring is in two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and resembles a hard ganglion, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cools it in the pincers, so it cannot be undone.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and the other likeness begins towards the great sewer, and grows little by little until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your lap, then you work on the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper to your hand, then curl the finger like scissors of small doubleure, and stretch it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or oxhair, or beefhair, and make it strong.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and insert it among the fingers, and pierce through to the entire needle, and tie the finger with thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape off all the hair from the side of the finger that is above the skin and down to the joint, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct into all the subtle spaces and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear duct as it was before the incision, so that the body may not come accustomed to tears.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nails grow only to the fingernail or to the hair.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then one scrapes off all the fatty scum from which this form comes:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And beware that the scum does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the pimple is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision pours into the oil a little bit of boiled silk and makes a litargy from it, and leaves it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the doctor does what is needed so that they are healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle in, and the fingernails cannot enter, many times this appearance of nails is cured by medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it cover, then work with the patient's oil and take the scum lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently remove the scale from above subtly; and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason hastens there, then drip from your mouth into a cataract made of litargire and red chili pepper mixture, and stop the eye until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no obstacle is found in the eye, as an abscess forms, then wash it with milk, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the skin on the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it from the onion, and cut off a part but not all, so that tears do not come forth.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then drip into the eye red chili pepper mixture made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The eyes of some men never become red, and cover the prune with a yellowish substance, restrain above the paper, and turn to the backside, and seem like a rose made of pumice stone;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is such that the patient places his head on your shoulder, then he works the eyes, and cools all that flesh with suitable unguents to it, and sustains it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then pare the first flesh, and go on paring to the razor's edge until the end, and take care that you do not cut into the eye during the operation;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be like that of the spatula which we said in the incision of the tongue and with small forces one takes away the shag, just as the form shows after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of safflower or you distill a red-colored liquid and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the eye a cloth soaked in egg white, so that it may be assured of hot abscess;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if there is no longer anything, and the blood rushes to the surface, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave off and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make the joints set in the oil by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is also necessary that you ease the treatment of each weak joint according to natural ways;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and by the accidental way, in iron work;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are bearing up under this treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If there are veins that are red and covered on the eye, and tolerate the work of their sight and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary therefore at first to observe what the joint is like, in which it swells, and whether it is inflamed, and there is no other disease besides the swelling;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then bind the joint in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins throughout all the way according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle doubles according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the two ointments be by degrees in one mass according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then tie those veins subtly and extract the blood hour after hour until you see the veins move away from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not obscure the eye with the points of the spatulae, and perform this work at the hour of noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not slip up on those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill in the eye a bitter green and red liquid to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous glands.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are unable to tie it all up in that hour, then apply a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are assuaged and you are assured of the abscess being hot, then recommence according to this manner which is before until he is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the powers:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The doctor is called "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it by cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is reason to open up the abscess where it should be, and extract all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove it with all the instruments of which this is the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspre chief", and make it smooth up to the point where it is not rough again, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on top of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your thumbs, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and make so every time then restore the place with medicinal remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the wound is sealed and there is no bleeding, and the bowels are sealed and remain thus for 40 days, and it does not fester and is not abscessed, and evil consequences do not occur, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	but if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to its natural outlet according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time by fire and by old medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take a file according to this form, and let the point of iron be at three angles, and let the file be worn down just to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the socket, and withdraw your hand from the patient's point, then turn all the file until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it as if the blood flows if he holds his hand on his nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is formed and hardened, then the matter goes to nothing.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	for it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction to sight or decrease in vision, it is necessary that you bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then heal, then apply cupping glasses or cauterize in order to draw out the blood, then put a poultice on the eye made of aloe and aloes and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye and embalm it with bandages and drapings.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the drapings is that you take soft drapings, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of another according to the amount that the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it upwards with a firm bandage, and reapply the poultices to draw out without wounding.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the poultices and let the oil be strained day and night, and if it becomes swollen, then you should compress it tightly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the swelling after a day and a night, and if you see the oil repairing, that is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reapply the poultice and bindings, and the swelling and poultices until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The bursting forth of a grape-like vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes to the uveous membrane, then it opens up, and comes forth with paper-like flakes like grains of resin, and it is dreadful to behold.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it cover, the work is such that you should insert a needle into the root of the affected part below up to where it is above, then insert another needle where there is a doubled thread from the corner of the eye.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its setting;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then tie the loop of the doubled thread and bind a part of the vein around, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put on a linseed oil moistened in abundance.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it so that the thread takes hold with the vein, then apply the oil to things comforting as long as the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and at no time is the wound restrained by the vein except each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes into the very font of the oil, and dry out the moisture albugine and descend the eyes, and enter it immediately;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then pull it out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not far from a boil that is assembled in the eye, resembling a descending water, and it's not water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a well-prepared and straight seat, then take hold of the head with your two hands, and move it so much as you see the boil rise up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and do not descend, and let the light go away, and see the patient's things just as he used to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the boil's descent is not prepared just as we said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	then make the patient sit in your hands, then take a fine spatula and do on the keratinous cloth one piece by the continuation of the conjunctive with the keratinous cloth and the crown, until the boil comes out;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is issued, then distill in hot water with honey mixed with equal parts of honey and melissa or fenugreek boiled with honey, and then be treated by another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the likenesses of waters in the division, and what is needed for piercing;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	so that it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should have the patient sit in your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and bind the healthy eye very tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your left hand if the eyes are right-handed, the instrument which is called "almagda".
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the width of a thumb in that corner of the eye nearest to the smaller tear duct, then insert the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces into the eye, and feel that almagda comes into the empty thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is fitting that the measure of the path of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the espace which is from the prune to the end of the nourishment;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneous cloth, and then place the instrument just below where the water is, then express it under one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	The patient sees what is going on now, if he looks at him and the instrument is in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After you rest for a little, and if the water rises again to the second way, place force with the instrument, and when it is fully seated and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by rotating your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in water a little bit of salt crystal, and leave it under this oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put a poultice or a moist cloth of linen soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg white on the wound, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We and those who are of our time put a common brew with an abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then just prick the joint alone, and not go too deep by much, but make it subtle, then put in alum, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient and the doctor to come, in which it sleeps on its back in this dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be still of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and remain according to his disposition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then loosen him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not necessary for you to do this in the work of the cure or after incising now, but rather that you ease him, because the water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess forms, then you should lance the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards that which soothes the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is eased, then lance the eye and put a poultice on its face for covering any day, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then go out of the dark house little by little, and adjust yourself to your condition;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the land of Irach, who told us that in his land he had seen a man with an almagda wound, which makes water come out, but I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of old.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of madness, because one who does not know them sees it;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and are of earth properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the ends of these should be of this same subtlety, and the last in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh on the nail.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes birthmarks or freckles appear unevenly distributed, which causes some to resemble scorptions in many places;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if one has such birthmarks or has one enchanted with fiery color, and another soft of pale color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that birthmark which is soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and apply the onion to those birthmarks, and treat them fiercely;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then do what you can sustain by the subtle and acute judgment of your part, as long as you know that that birthmark is entirely open.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, so work on all the instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it is not inflamed, or abscess appears, then hasten as is fitting.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it's malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize as much as the blood is staunched and all the dressings are removed, then pour or apply neat oil and vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the poultice works, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, to which instruments do not come to cut.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen about an inch thick there, and have it soaked in oil for us, and have between each night's space what should be or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's head against the pillow in his neck so that it is at its power, and pull towards the scent until it comes down through the neck into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times do this to children in schools, and it is a light thing for one who wants to make them do so;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes from the neck in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and tie one after the other as we are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as long as you know that the night has not corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the neck just like before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the oils corrode all that is remaining of flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on him a leather thong for some days until he is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, so he uses them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills oils and medicines or something:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and leads in the same way;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, then make a closed tube, and let the instruments be full to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have a handguard at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh on the nail.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease appears on the head called "telul", and it grows and becomes large over time, until it is visible to look at.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the top at the beginning, and remove all fur, then put on the cautery or burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you wait to cover it until it is great, then beware if it is hard, of a foul colour, of poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	for it will not be touched by iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut into it at some time, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not foul colour, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut it in such a way as to remove fear, and cure the limb of things constricting and binding.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nail is cut and cleaned.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, more than in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary that this happens in someone, so look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then stitch the two lips together with a seam, then heal it until he is sound.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their keratin until they heal, then stitch the two lips together with a seam, and bind them tight, and powder with powdered blood of dragon, and burn incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on powders a piece of ointment or other ointment suitable, and let it be until it clears up by itself, then cure with oil as long as it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of the stitching is that you bring together the edges:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	Of lip abscesses.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In the mouth, abscesses often arise within hard, resembling tiny peas, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each one, and take as many pinches and clip in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply a poultice to the place after the incision of vinegar broth, until the blood is staunched.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat the area with ointment, and care for the joint of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often a white spot appears on the gums which the ancient people called "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	so you should hold it with forceps, and cut to its root, and let the pulp or blood run.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place on the joint a vitriol ointment, or other drying and constricting powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the sore returns after the incision, and this often happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of abscesses.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are foul and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	so you should make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in thy faith, and receive the teeth or gums that appear, until there is nothing left;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other spots, until they are cleansed;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if you take away what is at the first reason, it's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	but if not, then recommence on the second day and the third, until you have everything cleansed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth have need of various forms of instruments to clean, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one removes tartar from the teeth has other forms than the one with which one cleans between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are to be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, for this should not happen at all.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance just up to when one has no excuse to regret.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is constrained to go out, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient's pain was so great that they thought it was in their tooth, and believed that it was a holy tooth, and had the good tooth pulled out.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not depart from him on account of this, until the bad humor departs, for we have already wanted to do this with these saints;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the tooth's pain, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth with a spatula very strongly to keep the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your hands or fine pincers at the first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then secure the pincers well.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's hip be between your holy knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it inside from each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is perforated and eaten away, then you should fill it with cloths, where the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you strain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to carefully cover around the gum for loosening the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and leave one part, and reinsert it into the patient through the malicious root causing greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who, because of their haste and boldness, sometimes break the carriage and do not bring about what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes bring about great harm through the decay of those roots that remain, or by breaking the carriage, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is loose, wash it with wine or with vinegar and with oil;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if there is bleeding and it comes, which often happens, then apply the place with a piece of vitriol crushed.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments, by which one should extract the teeth first, should be long-pointed and thick-gripped, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And have large handles so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth to keep them from slipping.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the roots remain to be pulled out, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton cloth on the wound for one or two days until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems like the beak of a hawk;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made inside as if with a file and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire layer of skin around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out for this reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, then use all the instruments, by which forms come forth hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two handles, this is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front of the roots of teeth, and this instrument which seems like great forceps, this is its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of dent are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and wise and subtle masters find by themselves the instrument that is suitable for each patient's disease, according to their work and the malady they present, for there are certain diseases where ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if it does not break the bone or any other bones, or where it can be done, then he seeks out the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, by which the form comes forth hereafter:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it may not escape but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone and it is small, so that it returns to all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, and especially in young girls, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is next to the other tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be straightened or trimmed.
adonques lou raie;	then draw it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is stuck with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like this and looks like a small beak, and has an iron point sharp to the tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the edge grows gradually day by day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can file it, then use a similar file as this is its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in a little lime, the tooth peels away bit by bit over a few lighter days, so that it does not move until it falls out.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the gum is smooth at the end and there is no rough edge, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then it is necessary to file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth in front is loosened, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without choking, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and this does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	so they must be restrained by a thread of gold, for the sons of silver become green and perish, but the gold does not change once.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the proportion of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	et if you see the teeth to be aligned, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the jawbone between my teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach bleeding just to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then start the covering just to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and carefully, until it does not move anymore;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then tie the jawbone with thread to a pair of tongs, and assemble them, and reposition between the healthy tooth and thus so it does not hurt the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay that way, and if it comes loose or the thread breaks, then strain it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remained and served thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the addressing of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, little by little, just as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and does not intervene except for one who is wise and enduring, and sometimes one makes the shape of a cow's tooth of bone, and puts it in the place where there is a defect, and holds it so as we have said, and stays and serves thus long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the link of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this fault comes from under the tongue or by nature, which is born in this way;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or through the accidental wound that has been healed;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you work on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your healthy hand, and lift up the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then tie the nervous ligament of the thigh, so that the tongue is released from its station, and if there is stiffness or swelling, and it's a sudden wound, then insert the unguent and tie the ligament;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and take care that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is below.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done, then lift up the wound of rose and easy water, or cold water, and put a linen tent under the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and dress the patient's wound each night, so that the swelling cannot harden.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if there is a flow of blood, then put vitriol powder on the wound;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the bleeding increases, then burn it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for that.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is a foul or black or hard boil, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining towards the bladder, and there is moisture, so that it discharges pus, and makes a fine sputum, and delivers from one side and another;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood flows at your work, so put on a vinegar poultice until it is staunched, then return to your work as long as you are drawing out all the pus;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift up the head of the neck and shoulder, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes a lump comes into the throat which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two tonsils, and when you cure them as we have said in the section, and they are not healed, then beware:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is an abscess of long duration with little sense and a dull color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the avoidance of excessive bleeding;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it remain until it is dead, and then you will lance it, or it will burst on its own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and reopens, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see if the abscess has calmed down and is pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hands be in thy hand, and the servant hold the mouth open and take the tongue between his hands, and press the tongue downwards onto all the instrument, so that it takes its form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or refined lead, just as sharp knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can't you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the pincers and fix it in the almond, and draw the thread above as far as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and don't touch anything with the cloths, then cut at the instrument, of which there is the form, that seems like one force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and yet the head is curved, and from one side to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, by which the form appears:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be cut on one side and on the other named;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water or cooked skin of pomegranates, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then care for the patient until they are healed.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes abscesses arise in the throat besides those two almonds; if so, then cut them as the two almonds grow together.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and I had already well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced its way out through both holes of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then hastened at once, and placed one onion in it, then the tumor burst open and a large portion of pus came out;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made another incision on the other side of the abscess, and opened up her mouth and pressed her tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After incising these abscesses, and cutting off a part, and only one drop of blood issued forth.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the passages of the throat were dislodged from the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting off that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess re-crossed again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I bound it and cauteryed it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it remained without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I departed from those parts, and only God did something with them after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the swelling goes down to the vein, and it is emptied and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is under a thick and rounded one, then it is called "vein".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess has been calmed, and it is subtle, so you must cut.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and she who is roundly assembled and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and she is sanguine or of a flesh color or black, so you must avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger on the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its swelling and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have mentioned above.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then stick the onion into the eye, and train it downwards, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural boundary;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you intervene more, so it troubles to voice, and to word;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear to cover, you should use cunning at the cauterization of their sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp as an edge.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and confesses with hot water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use the handle of this instrument, which has this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And there is on the head a covering or where one puts the medicine, just as the hairs of a cauldron, and put the instrument over all the medicine on the ulcer.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should sit on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat and the wound.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the vein, for the amount of time equal to half an hour, until you see it congealed and the medication's abrasions are soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see, take cotton and envelop it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and fill the instrument with all the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton is applied to the vein.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and check after four days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to reapply the medicine cauterization, then reapply it, and after the cauterization, apply a poultice around the vein, with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse all that is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let them be bathed with cold water, and treat with gargling so long as they are cleansed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision, not the fire cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put air in it, and make it boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well glazed with hard earth, and inside the pot have an instrument carved according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or lead, and one of the ends sealed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eardrum through the canal, until the eardrum is numbed.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	afterwards it often renews itself, until the eardrum is dry, and be sure you do not do this at the beginning of the abscess's heating up, for many things happen there.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not cause any harm except at the cutting of an abscess hot.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cord and put a goose quill inside the head, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the goose quill does not allow the steam to weigh on the mouth, and it is good care together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often one should secure a piece of neck bone or fish spine, or nothing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so then you should test what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not appear to you and is returned in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if the things are thrust out through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a root of lettuce, or a fragment of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and then thread is attached to the sponge and then it is swallowed again;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes out, if it gets stuck, and then you will pull it out;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of purling according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And the instrument should be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head lifted upwards;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest all life come to it, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and make sure that the patient pushes the instrument, for thus the thing is forced out;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the ball is below, or he pulls it far away from all the instruments evenly, so that it is far.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the sweat of the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No bloodless remedy is medicine for the without-sense, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of remedies;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sweat, then take it away with all small needles or fine forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this doesn't work, then take a braided cord, and tie it around the patient's neck, then heat the iron rod at the end of the cord, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is troubled by water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it to his hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood feels the water, it should be stopped.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not stop as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asafetida, to the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	It happens many times, for it will fall without a target.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has burning coals, and the opening should be covered with a perforated cloth sheet in the middle, and on that hole should be the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you cast your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in their mouth and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out but comes just to the sweat.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the sweat will now fall, and if it does not fall, then you begin the fumigation again many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers thirst, and takes bitter things and salts, and does not drink water at all.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it is necessary that they issue forth by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	The shape of the instrument with which one draws out pus is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved tweezers for inserting into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the resemblance of a doctor's beak, and has the asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and thus is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many likenesses of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings forth on this side and that in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners, one of which is its own likeness, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the bones that are at the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fatty tissue are different from those that come together in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if abscesses should not be pierced at all, until the pus is fully formed according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, just as those abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beneath joints, and one leaves it until it is rotting all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is located below the main member, and if you delay the piercing until it is mortified, so it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where it is located at the foundation, if one pierces it when it is dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not necessary that you pierce an unripe abscess without complete digestion, except for one located at the foundation, which cannot be pierced to its depth and becomes elongated inside and thus a fistula forms;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and it cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the departures of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make the puncture sit or lie dependent on the abscess, and where it opens up movements;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the puncture should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who ache, by consequence of that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the skin hardened, so it is best that you leave the puncture until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce before that, the body will be lengthened with the venom from it, and will be filled with much foul matter;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and the inner parts of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according as the members may need it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring out small abscesses, small pustules;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in great abscesses, great pustules, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the skin, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When he is become as grey as the flags, and is wasted away, so it is necessary to do likewise as one does with infants:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if they are split into three angles, and if there are those of which one cuts in the manner of myrtle leaves, just as abscesses of angels;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if they are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar trimming.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, like a soft abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you make an incision completely.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, and you make an incision, so do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but only some part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not touch anything above it;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Make them so repeatedly by degrees, until the bowels open completely.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Meanwhile, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pulse beats quickly sometimes with the issue of pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound bleeds, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it's a clean incision, then try to apply linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it's a large abscess and there are many perforations, then you must bind each one with a tent so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut away a part of the abscess from the skin and wrapped it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or a dry cloth made from linen, free from moisture, and bind it just to the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the surgeon and the oil doctor until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs at your work, then administer cold water and vinegar, and damp cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the purging of blood persists, and he is administered government and care, and the powders that I have said are used in this book, and it is during the time of winter, and the lesions or abscesses are very nervous, then you should put on tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the lesions are fleshy, then you should put on wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then dissolve the abscess and the scab and the wound, as it is necessary, until he is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come from the head, and they are like little nests that we find in fabrics, just as a sparrow's nest is woven with threads, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some fat and such that also have moisture like boils;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are those which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt that the artery does not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of cutting are such that you try out all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then let them make an incision above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, then scrape off without leaving anything the skin that contains that moisture, for it comes back again if you leave anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and silk, and dress the wound, and let it be just until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those who are left of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then rebegin with cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of oiling as is fitting, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess is not very swollen, then cut it according to this form, long-wise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and tear off the scabs, and flay it all around, and put all your care in drawing out the abscess where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the arteries resist you, then do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this with the abscess if it is pustular, and to cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting on the pustular abscess and the moist one is lighter, for they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and those abscesses that I cut open on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had broken any of them, one would have made as much a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, let the opening be always at its most dependent place so that the pus may issue.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat it as is fitting.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are many and are intertwined with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly located within its own coat, like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and also there are evil ones who do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	then look for one with good disposition to be touched, and it is similar in color to the body, quiet on each side and is not inflamed towards the neck veins nor arteries nor canal, and is not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	then you should scrape it above and remove the scab from each part, and if you need, take off the two lips of the scab on the nails, just as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	et the wound is small and small, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor let the spatula touch or press, lest the hands escape, and do not go too far, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and what you do does not let you proceed, then put in the wound a bit of vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding, and hold back the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then look at what remains as if there were no small ulcers, and cut them and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if it has a great vein in the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall down without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then wrap the wound in an old cotton cloth soaked in Egyptian oil, then apply treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cover the entire scrophule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, then there will be no remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrophule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and pull strongly, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that have superfluity, puncture there where it becomes moist;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and puncture it in the same way as the one mentioned before, depending on the case, then apply poultices with oil and similar things, so that what is left of the corruption may corrupt.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
de squinance	of squinancy
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	To those who have suffocated, it is necessary that the incision in the throat called "epiglote" be made.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are inflamed at the abscess in the mouth or in the throat or in two armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglote in order to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut from the suture, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and this is necessary for the cutting of the epiglote because there is no flesh and the vessels are long in inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its extent, then cuts the leather so that it comes to the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid shedding blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the suture so that we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the incision of the vein of the chin which jumps forth through the broken place and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it all by itself without the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that cause growth of flesh until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	On does not make this just so long as the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four; then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maid take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut out part of the channels of the womb;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I knew that she had not cut her throat nor conducted anything except the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed her until she was sound.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happened to the maiden that she became hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her normal condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This is a dislocation. It is called "hernia of the throat" and is a great abscess in the color of greenish copper, and it occurs mostly in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no deceit.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is in two ways, of which one resembles fat to us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and if there is fear, and it does not behoove to work with fire except in one who is small, and test and examine through all the intervening flesh:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I say fat, and is unable to be moved by any means, so cut it, as one cuts fat, and treat it all with its own cloth, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine well everything, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	of the nose
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	We have many methods among us, which I will say all are similar;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I tell all the difference that is between beginning and end.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that end is heat and fever remaining, until the ebullition has passed, and the corruption is completed;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then restlessness of fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new one there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains the pus, which are its own sacs and correspond to the color of the flesh, and begins like a jaundice, and becomes swollen;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to its appearances, either fatty, or moist, and have many colors as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the nose, that you examine and inquire first through all the instrument which is called "interstice", according to what its form will be or the chapter which comes afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses is that you take a more moist place than you find within the abscess, and turn your two fingers in and out, so long as you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissoire, and take care that it does not jump away.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture comes forth quickly, regardless of its color, then do as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes forth, know that it is hard, then do as I have said in a cross shape, and take hold of it with pinceures, and gently scrape off each part and watch the coat where it lies so you can lead out the pus without harm.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it apart in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, then the wound comes back many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if there is still a little left and the blood grieves, then apply a wound with some corroding powders, and stop the bleeding, and put hot soothing things on the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut off both lips of the wound, and cure what remains with whatever flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein is contrary to you or another thing that hastens and applies vinegar mixed with vinegar, and lets it be for two days or three, until the wound purifies, and let the boiling of blood settle.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then come back to closing what remains of the cut.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Behold here the forms of the inner instruments, and they are of three manners:
grans et moien et petit;	large and middle-sized and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret", one of which is called "breb", and there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	great, middle-sized, and small, in order to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are of citrine stone, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most proven for encircling the abscesses of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the probes are of many likenesses, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are those who have two kinds of three types also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are those who have three kinds of third type, and are also of three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are those who have two kinds, and some with only one kind, and are of three types;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than from one side, for which we castrate the nerves, so that one cannot draw blood or touch the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and from these instruments are made bandages that respond in strips, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and don't use more force than in the natural joints, such as legs, arms, shoulders, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scissors for flintstones, according to this form, by which blood is staunched;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the location where veins and arteries are healed completely, and sometimes according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and inflamed, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to boil according to this form of the line from b to g;
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine injecting flesh, then close the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the nipple points downwards and is concealed because of its great size like it has in women, so cut it into two folds above, by two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is attached to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then flay the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about dressing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed or the incision is not entirely done because the patient will not rest or due to the bleeding of blood, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave him so long as he wastes away the remainder and fat, then cure him until he is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulae or those with nodules, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture need to be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care for it with oil suitable to this purpose until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the same kind as scrofulae, then cut it as we have said in incisions for scrofulae, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the arteries are blocked, and the skin above is bound together, so there often arise abscesses, and it happens just as frequently that a vein becomes inflamed and forms an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long in the back and front.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it at your joints, then you feel a straining.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and if it is due to the vein, then it appears as swelling.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits, in the groin, or at the neck and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is then necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head also needs to avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from artery trouble do not make a cut above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the shape so it becomes one with the skin, and gently separate the artery from the threads, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then push a needle underneath the one, and make it pierce just to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two loops, according to what I have instructed you about the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then insert the point that is between the two loops of an introducer until the blood flows out that is there, and loosen the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment as the bowstring tightens, until the bandage falls off;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat those with ointment suitable for them, until they are healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is due to the cutting of a vein, then it is necessary that you wet with your hand all that part of the skin where the abscess is, then push a needle underneath the point you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be one double thread, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then apply the aposteme, as I have told you, to one of the two parts at the two joints of the shoulder.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then replace another needle on all of the thread below the entire aposteme to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the aposteme until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the cure and leave what is attached.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a damp cloth soaked in vinegar and oil on it, then administer poultices and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also just like abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come on the nails when they are worn out or from excessive work and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens at joints and in the shoulders and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous aposteme, and its color appears like the color of the flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one constricts it strongly, then the patient feels pain, and is not entirely in the depths of the heart, but beneath the liver;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it is well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and he who is in joints does not consent to be cut by iron;
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance there may be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is in the head or on the forehead, forms the leather at the scapula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, one should take hold of it with forceps and cut its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, one should suspend it with a ligature, and scrape, then cut and reassemble the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	At times it happens in bellies and not elsewhere so much, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to those things, and it has subtle roots and a big head;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are both small and very great ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two on his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and they had split open and were oozing moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of incision is such that you consider whether the patient is moist, and the color of the articular flesh is white and moist and has a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if he cuts in the spatula-like area wide, and there are cauterizations with fire present before you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when cutting comes often too great flowing of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind it to the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the linen thread until it cuts through the artery, and let it be guided by its own work;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, then have fear not to cut it at all for the belly's sake, but you can well cut off the half, and then cauterize so that it does not revive;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and be sure to cut off the thread which is of a fuzzy color and has poor sensation and little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the cure of chancres later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or a split in the syphilitic abscess, and it is on the belly and is accompanied by some swelling, just as it happens in other ulcers, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from inflammation;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	et if it is due to the rusting of the sores and by the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears through various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is much more diverse, and when one presses it at its base it swells up, and then returns, and by chance becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's because of moisture, it's a light thing, and it shows well when you press it with your hand, not at all constraining.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it's because of blood, then it shows by these signs the abscess is large and hard, and it's fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it's because of windiness, then it is sensitive to the toucher, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave off the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his reins and be stretched out straight, then sign around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then instruct the patient to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the joint you have marked for all the surrounding tissue, then cut off the top half of the abscess to the great unguent.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the bow be thoroughly secured.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on the half of the abscess that extends over the bandage, and thrust your finger into it, and cut the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught on the bandage, then release it, and insert the intestine back into the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, take hold of it at the intestine, and cut away the superfluity.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein resists you, go around it gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads into them, and tie the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you made pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess with four leaves above the needles; and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the leaf until it can bear, and let the dead flesh perish by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is subtle and can bear, then cure with whatever is needed, and leave the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the leaf with whatever is needed, and bind the leaf.
dou chancre	of the chancres
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the section about ulcers, and how one should work with them by medicine, and how one should avoid iron treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say that ulcers in the groin are very bad and require great care in treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are on the leg or can be removed like those in the armpits, and in the crotch, and similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning when it starts.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is great and old, you must not approach it, for I have never seen any healing from it;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purify the patient sometimes with black gall;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it healthy if it has evident fullness, then place the patient in good condition to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then throw out your clamps or chancre, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts leaving nothing behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely and press well on the place with your hand or something, and if the decoration of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cautery until the bleeding is stopped;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the doctor will treat another wound until they are healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure made by medicines, and that which is cured by fire.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only illuminated;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch with iron in these two likenesses:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanitis and hydropsy, for it is mortal.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you are using medicines for this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease other than dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one should not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient with strong vigor, and he has no other disease except dropsy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then thus you should proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	hold the patient upright on your hands, and the attendants press the belly with water at the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine thorn according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it cut to two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to the point, and even if it is not so deep that it can reach just to the intestine when you insert it, and cannot harm it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look to see if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	then it is necessary that you cut on above of the third tooth, straight downwards from the lip;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the third tooth;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to laxity, whether to the right or not, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie over the fissure so that the superfluidities do not flow to that weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and stop it, and lift your hand away from all the spatula-like substance between the skin and the scab just as when trimming to the quantity of an eyelash or around;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the scab until the spatula-like substance comes to a natural outlet, and that is the exit of water, then wash it thoroughly, and put this instrument away, and that is its shape;
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and it is of gold or light lead, and in the part below there is a small perforation;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three perforations;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and he of another part, and one of another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut off like a feather, and it's the shape of the incision that writers make on a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the alembic, so that when instruments come to water, they now flow on the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then drain the half or third part, because if you drain more than is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of their soul from the wound, or they may fall into a faint, or approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but drain it according to the quantity of their virtue, and according to what the patient's vital signs indicate, and their pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the reason that stops the perforation which is above the syphac, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then resume using the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this any day, and be careful not to wash so long as there is still but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and leave too much water, so that the wound or sand becomes hot, and through excessive sweating or bathing and sun exposure, and it turns into drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat with drying medications until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have a hernia in the genital area, or the hernia is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If he must then pierce through all the skin layers very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put the small plug of clay under him, and tie it and keep it thus for three or four days until he wants to make urine, then remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance there is no need for it, because the urine that comes forth does not allow it to remain closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	That of whom the pustule is small, it is treated with a poultice of cloth, as we have said, and will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the fistula in its place are wounded, because none are born with the fistula at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot flow because the material cannot come just to the margin, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies often on his back, and then takes hold of the head of the penis and cuts it like the shape of a quill, so that the fistula opens in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the flowing of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and care for the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of the pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these things come to pass in the vulva, and there is an appearance of bad flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and among them are malignant ones and not.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	so it is necessary that you take them with subtle medicine, and cut and clean all of them, then apply damp cotton in Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then anoint with divine ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, with foul odor and putrid color, then it is necessary that you apply a cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it off, and the excrescence is in the vulva, and some part is within the skin and some part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the excrescence which is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is healed, then anoint the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you anoint it all together, it is not at all assured that the head of the vulva will not be pierced, and there will come blackness and corruption in its own vulva and on the skin.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to heal all that is black and corrupted, then lay upon the plaster of honey and flour which is made from the rind of green apples and vetches, then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding comes from it, so apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The fire cauterizes in two dispositions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, by the purging of blood and by corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you tie or guide a piece of cloth to the foreskin, and make the patient urinate in between;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is inflamed at the head of the foreskin which has not been circumcised, either due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you cut away with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the foreskin be released from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a great thing to divide them, then you should skin him at the spatiumile about a little below the head of the penis and scrotum;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then sever them nicely between two, and place a thin cloth of moistened linen in cold water, so that it will not stick again.
de la circoncision	Of Circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not the disconnection of continuity as with other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	although we do this work of our own will and properly with children, it is necessary that we make the best and most gentle work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen that the greatest part of masters and seniors who performed circumcision were around me, by force, and all alone.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	so that the skin would break because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut the one above and leave the one below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	The wound recovers slowly, and there is doubled pain, and the member's tip is not assured at all.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and the abscess is cleaned by chance and escapes the iron, and the work runs, and many times it happens in this way that there is no need for cleaning and I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mundification which is done with force I have found the goodness of experience, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it is cut equally in all the fingers to the same length;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread be well tightened around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only making him bind the thread around the rod, and then let it relax in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it stay between your hands straight, and reapply the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	put your hand on the handle and blow or squeeze, and pull it up until the head of the handle is in place;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well from the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place marked with a doubled thread, then tie it underneath one link and the other.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it in place by the second thread at the pouch and the pointing finger, and cut between the two links, then lift the key above hastily and pull up the head of the handle.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, because it is purging.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on top and on the powder a cloth glued with a hen's egg yolk cooked without water, mixed with rose oil good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and then treat it again as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at the time of confluence thus is:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two heads should be held and pressed together, and the heads should also be as large as the hands in equal measure:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the mistake at the time of confluence is when the humors inside flow during the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	therefore it is necessary that you spread it to your finger, so that the swelling makes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they continue for three days, and what is under the scab is swollen, then let it be until the abscess is appeased, and scrape it lightly.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	and cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the scab, so that it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure then the joint of sudden injury from powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if it is cut too much outside measure, and it goes above, so it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to stoning of the kidney, or blood congealed, or bladder, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone or knot in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bound on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let their feet be placed on the back, and stretch his belly from above the back, and bind the patient's arms as tight as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the collar of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is loosened.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringe", which is this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be a fine, thin, silver thread, like the quill of a bird.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and it should be the length of a palm and a half, and fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of urination is that you take a doubled thread, and tie it at the head to a piece of linen or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and remove the excess of the linen and insert it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and hen's gall, and make the patient sit on a siege, and raise the bladder and the urethra with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then put the syringe lightly on the vein, until it comes to the root of the vein, then fold the vein upwards towards the mouth.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then insert the syringe almost to the bladder, and feel the patient's body come almost to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide or director of it is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then draw out the thread slowly and slowly along all the woolly parts, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it further, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and begin the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and the patient be eased.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then make all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three perforations:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	One on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the warts fall out because the medicine is such that it stops well the vein without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and insert when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you put your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and draw on the drawing that is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull out the moisture to the cauterizer, and then press hard on the drawing that is inside;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	so the moister will go inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder:
si est ci:	so that it is this;
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or archaust, and the head is higher up;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below at the navel or where the bandage falls;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moister in it that you use to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pot over the fire on top of that moister.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then put the head of the catheter into the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture that happens, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put a strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a door, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the section the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I said the difference between a pierced stone and one that has been struck by rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work with a chisel;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the urethra;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps out of the bladder resembling water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and I will advise heresy, and instruct the patient to scratch his penis, and he will do this many times, and then become inflamed.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and as a result of these jumps, foundations fall away;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the recovery of children is light until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is in middle-aged people, who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient through purgation, in order to draw out all the bad blood that is within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Take the patient by the feet, and lean him back and move him down below, so that the heel descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from a high place.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is all leaning downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then question and touch it inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not yield to the touching at all, then moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and thrust it into its foundation, and question the stone, and when you feel it with your fingers, then apply it to the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press above on your kneecap, and bind it to the outer side away from where you will cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out with his right hand the membranes above, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the membranes in the part where you will make the incision.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then bind the spatula tightly, so it forms:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make a space between what is between the membranes and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the right flank.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And be straight on the stone, and your knees should be at the foundation, and the incision should be wide on the outside and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	In case the pressure is such that the knee which is at the foundation jumps away without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such a stone where there are angles, and margins:
si est griés a issir;	so it is grey to issue;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is one that is worn out, resembling a flint, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To this then where it has angles and margins, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, then it is necessary that you strain on the pincers which are also like a file at the top, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you put below the said instrument a subtle curved one at the top;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot shape it thus, then enlarge the small hole and if the blood flows out, strain it with vinegar;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then file it straight, and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it must be sewn, and a greater wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	Because two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine flows forth soon after, as the flesh cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nonetheless force it with a file or chisel with pincers, until you cut it into pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and cover it with a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then rewrap the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, then rise up very well with oil and water, and then cure him with balsam of diaphaneikon and balsam of basilikeon, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot apostemes come to the wound and ulcers, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it stays the urine which is known in this manner as not leaping with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then press your thumb into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, so will the bladder be corrupted, and it will perish.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then wash the wound with water and vinegar and silk, and aid him in all ways that you know, until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the works that you use to cure him, that you bind his two hips together, and assemble the medicines on the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra of the penis, stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	So do as I say then, cutting it many times, or excuse cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I've already experienced it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron fork according to this shape and let it be fixed at three angles in one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and wrap it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come down into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then insert the forest (cauterizing iron) into the lighter limb, so it comes to the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the iron back to your hand in small strokes, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the limb.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	So it is then broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then place one thread under the stone and another above, then make the limb meet the stone between the two threads, then pull it forth, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal him until he is sound.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Stone is often lodged in women, and when it does occur, it is a grievous cure, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second reason is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman's body is more inwardly placed than the stone in a man's body, so one must make a deeper incision and there is great fear. And if necessity demands it, then you should take a well-informed midwife, and once you find one, she will guide you, and if you cannot find one, then choose a subtle midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present one shows a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command regarding the incision of stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look closely if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to strengthen her dowry or foundation and seek out the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she forces her to put the stone underneath her dowry, and commands her to strengthen her dowry with the patient, and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it is most manifest, and feel the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move his two (joints) above or below the stone or soot, and is the size at first small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then bind the linen on the wound, if you feel the stone so close to the sore that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those which have ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood flows, then apply a glass-like powder to it, and keep it there for an hour until the blood is stanched.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is further out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood flows, and it's from an artery that is cut, then apply powder to the wound and tie with tents and bandels, and do not re-start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest perhaps the patient would die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place has been dressed, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramie's water is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white mucus that lies beneath the skin of the groin, which contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "white spawn", and never is properly contained in the eggshell if one believes that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the groin between the white spawn that we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen unless.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the genesis of this Ramice is from weakness that comes to the scrotum, and spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never if it comes from percussion on the groin, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it declines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is the white spawn that we have said, then there is the abscess swelling, as long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the groin, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper wool, it seems that the abscess rejoins with part of the egg, and so one thinks that it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white shin, he feels well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the surrounding quarters thoroughly, in order that the shape is as it was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to these things then that come after the introitus, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, it's necessary that the patient be cleansed according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then apply a poultice on his back, on something slightly high, and place many cloths under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the beam onto one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and let it lie on the skin between the long part until it reaches the nail, and make your incision straight while cutting through the skin of the scrotum just to where it becomes white, and scrape it subtly according to what is possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the scrotal skin with water at the largest opening, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and cover the scrotum above.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the skin of the scrotum, but only the scrotum itself;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all or in small pieces yourself, as well, so subtly that it is on the other side, because if you do not cut it well, the water will come back;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the testicle jumps away from your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished the work on the scrotum;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then gather up the two books of keys of joints to one seam, then care for it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, fearing the depletion of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then set the joint back to all its suspensions, and extract the egg, and care for it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the water is gathered together in two parts together, know that they are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then set the other part in equal manner as you did the first, then stop the blood, and put a linen cloth moistened with rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another linen cloth moistened with wine and oil on it, and set the two joints together, and put a doubled napkin over them, and tie it up all around according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and employ them to be made of wool yarn according to this resemblance and let them be assembled by sewing in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the cloths takes place on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hand.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two cloths take place on both armpits, and let all be assembled in a binding at the buckle of the breech.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and at times this medicine of cauterization takes place in lieu of iron cutting, and it is that you take a subtle cauterizing knife, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syphilis-containing water descends.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	so take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that white syphilis-containing water once, and scrape it off with this subtle hot cauterizer.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And set the bone in all ways you can, until you have fixed everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and make sure that fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of bleeding, and be careful with the works of cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you contrary, or an abscess forms or bleeding occurs or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horribleness, then persuade perforation, as I tell you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs we have said that the abscess is gone, sit the patient on a light bed.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the part below all along the spine, and make the perforation as long as the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the ulcers be large, so that all the liquid runs freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining liquid flow out, then care for it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not let the liquid come out in the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a pin or the instrument used to drain the water from dropsical patients, by which the swelling will be thus;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the ulcer, and know that the liquid returns, and is assembled after six months or in as much as it was before, and when it is assembled like before, and thus will the patient spend their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this reed, there is more fear than many preparations, because it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come from the body, and indeed also from the kidneys;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be known through excessive acidity and biliousness, which spreads to the kidneys, or from blows;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and there is no pain at all, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance some abscesses are grievous, pale and flabby, with a dull color, and sometimes it comes from the obstruction of an artery or the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it's due to the obstruction of an artery, then it is known by the hot appearance of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not behoove you to touch there.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	He who is skilled in the art of bleeding from a vein is known by his ability to express the pulse at the wrist, and can well perform the incision according to this likeness, and on other animals.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you should cut open the shell of the egg, then lift it up and take out the yolk from above, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already softened with those juices, then it behooves you to take out the yolk and cut open.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is in the sac or in what is inside the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all that tension and cut open again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut away all of it and extract the yolk, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, and then care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enveloped in a wrapping similar to a fig leaf, with the softening of the shell, and the patient becomes grievously ill when he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is equally frightening as the one before, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory device of the testicles down to your knees, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and take hold of them, and stretch them firmly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut the spatula-like instrument sharply wide on either side of the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert an awl where there is the doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come forth, and then tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then straighten out the skull in mid-division, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others that are torn open, so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the testicles.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for in this case there is no harm coming from it, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to draw out the testicles from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the ears do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they shrivel up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the roughness of the scurf.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this remedy are by the section that comes from the hernia or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, therefore the intestines descend into that hernia to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this hernia is either from the hernia or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes.
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or by percussion, or by leap, or by braying, or by lifting a heavy burden, and through similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is of the extension due to syphilis, so it has poco and poco, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal up to the very bottom, because syphilis presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the scurf, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse appearing abscesses below the skin near, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body flowing out of the scurf.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at no time do the loops go down with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when he is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures there is fear, why it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put their hand inside the wound and into the intestines if they can fit.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then press down on his neck between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the skin above, and cut away all the skin of the scrotum long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put in the leaves of the size and shape that you need to open the wound, so that the eye may come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the white scurf that is below the skin of the testicles, until the white scurf is completely removed from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then press your thumb into the crease where the testicle is located, between the white scurf that is below the skin of the testicle and between the second scurf, and from behind the testicle, and between the second scurf.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then push with your right hand into the fold of the testicles, and lift the white scurf up to your left hand, and raise the testicle to all the scurf towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle up high, and release what is behind the tie;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your hands if there is any point of the intestine enveloped or wrapped around the white scurf, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly underneath.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle where it has the thick thread made of ten threads, and bind it to the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the size, then cut the threads that appear from sons, as long as there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then tie them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and bind the scrotum, which we have said is under the skin of the testicles, with a very strong cord of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the threads of sons around them, and tie them together with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest a suppurating abscess does not come to be;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the cord above that according to the first cord long two fingers of its length, and after these two cords leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles a finger's width;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all other things according to the roundness that the egg bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is below the skin of the testicles, until the blood flows and the bowels move, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply wet wool in oil to wounds, and place on injuries, and apply the bandage that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And any time the white sacrum bone is cauterized as we said, after incision, due to fear of excessive bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it does not fall off, then use hot water and apply to what we have said, until it falls off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient ones say that it is made like the tendril that surrounds the liver, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting above and gently below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then strike me middle, and heal the abscess of those who work, until the servants die;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Once in a while comes gangrene in the fingers, as we have said, and opens up the flesh;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not remove any of the intestines from the abdomen, and if some come out, it is little, and repair them every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and anyway if he stays too long in this position, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines come out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the abscess which is on the fingers, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swelled the flesh and opened up;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is cured by fire in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then shape the lump of swollen flesh to its natural size according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then draw out the skin that is under the blister that follows, and take the red part and place it on top of the apparent flesh of the blister.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it to the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent blisters of the skin on top of the red part, and cut one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then draw out the top of the red part, and do not cut or stretch anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the hiccups of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it by treating wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you dress the wounds, sooth and cure the sore, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sacrum is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the coccyx
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the scrotum is softened in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary when one wants to heal him that you make the patient lie down on his back and loosen the skin that is softened over natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring together the two lips at a seam, and if you see fit, sew up the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then loosen between the seams and cover it as you would other wounds, until he is healed, and let the thread fall away.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castration is esteemed in our law, and for this reason it would please me that I not speak of it at all in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary only by two means:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the mirror responds in a healthy manner when one asks him about his health and about the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that castration is done in two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by traction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of castration by size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you bind the beast and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle one stroke, when you have well circumcised them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no part of the scrotum or the thin scrotal sac that is above the vas deferens;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of castration is more sure than that which is done by traction, because in the traction something may remain of the testicles by chance, whereby the beast desires lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermafrodite is according to two manners in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one being that between the two testicles it opens like the shape of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes in court his urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has above the elbow as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the care for men and women is that you cover all the sores together, and care for them just as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no care.
de la tentigene	Of tetinegine
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigo is a sore located on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it just as large as a hand, and that's the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should dye the excess of the tentigo on your hand or on nails, and cover it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep into it, lest bleeding ensues, then treat with another treatment until they are healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another sign that appears on the lips of the mouth, and the swelling, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason the ancient people called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the incision, and cure until it is healed.
de erratique	Of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	it is erroneous when the woman's natural state is not perceived, or the pustule is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is a natural occurrence by birth, or an accident caused by disease that has come into being;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is due to a festering sore, or subtle or sharp abscess, and it occurs in the mouth, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and hinders conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers of having children;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is by the observation of the bale.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close to appearing, it is at your breasts or in the armpit.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a boil that is subtle and it is close to two books, then hasten and read thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two index fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spread her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then place the two books firmly, until the subtle boil is resolved, and cover it with poultices;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the boil, and place the woman at home each day, so that she cannot coagulate.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the abscess is hard and thick, so it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the poultice is of new charcoal, then suspend it on a hook and cut it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and aloeswood, together with abundant egg white;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then provide a strap of linen wide enough so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus be long, and provide a cloth of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marshes there comes flesh born, so it is necessary to cut it according to this manner, unless it be enchanted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the enchanted abscess in the marsh, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Varices are openings of veins that are not accustomed to being cut, and when varices are old they become hardened.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have said in the division the likenesses of them, and the signs, and I will say now those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply seated in the anus, and do not sense pain, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the entrance of the anus, where one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Then it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then take away the swelling with tweezers, and chop off its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then bind her feet with a bandage for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	et if bleeding occurs from it comes let the poultice sit on a decoction of sumac and orange peel and galls and similar things then take barley flour and mix with honey and oil and make an application on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he stays still, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breast so they don't cause pain.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take linen, moisten it in plantain juice or agrimony juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has healed, then treat the joint with ointment until it is sound.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles the gouty joint, so it must be covered as I said earlier.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it is sound.
des apostemes de la marris	Of apostemes of the belly
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come to the marriage, such as chancre and bony abscess and herpes and boils and blisters and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary then that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not one of the abscesses that cools down.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the work of iron, then observe whether the abscess is angry at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red so that you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then don't hurry to puncture, but let it cool down until the pain is appeased.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he reclines, and lean back on his back and bring his feet to the opposite side of the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his hips be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good cord.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then the ball goes towards the right side, and one brings in the instrument with which one works at the mouth of the mare's, from which the form comes.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you bring in this instrument, you make the first mark on it so as to know the depth of the mare's, so that what enters into the instrument does not go too far and does not hurt the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the mare's with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause her distress.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he puts the bell of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and one does it gently with the hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the top, at the spatula-like place.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowstring is empty, so it is necessary that you put damp linen cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil in the wound;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the bed, and place it above the bed and on the clean linen cloth moistened in water or mulberry leaves that are cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the patient after two days of dressing, according to this, until they are healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and at any time lift the bed and the wound by rinsing with water and honey, and then with water or lily roots and aloe long cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered with a marsh, then it is necessary to take care not to cook anything made of iron, but rather care for it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first at the bedside that she knows the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman go down below, and desire to give birth.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the child hastens to come out quickly;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then you know that this childhood is according to natural form, and the exit is under its head, and the second one with it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on his belly, so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he descends above his head, the afterbirth comes with him, and the mother is rid of her excesses through good purging;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes on his feet, and comes forth from the body or from the head, or hands, or comes above his belly, or in some other way, and is turned by chance around his neck, and through other bad forms;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes onto its head by natural birth, and the mother gives birth with difficulty, and the baby's strength is weak, then make it sit on a stool or have women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And let the baby's natural excretion of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour it between its navel and the little space that is the form.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the scab, and scrape off the nail as much as the moistors that are in the wound can do it.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and paint the woman's belly as long as the baby descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek mixture with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take a condiment and sternutate, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if it stays now the baby.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are far apart, you must pull them together gently little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then the woman sits on the seat and lifts up her feet high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then put the stool on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not stumble while standing up;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter and the child is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was placed here before, extract the child, and pull them together evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, you should support it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the foot and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the hips, then command it to bend, and make it stretch again with condiments;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps away, may God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not further than we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it doesn't come away as we have said, take myrrh of aloes, and oil of sassafras, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the nature of the woman inside and pour this unguent down to her navel, then make her sit in cold water down to below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened underneath, make a poultice of myrrh and put it underneath and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then make her walk and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the exit of the child from its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, I put the bail of its hands pinch by pinch;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then be mindful of his neck, and let his feet hang down below, and let him rest on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then take hold of his hands on the belly, and remove the pillows underneath, until it is arranged below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not jump, then take his feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and stroke the child gently.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to take hold until the infant comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the exit of the child that comes out with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to contrive how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and take off her legs well.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the musculage that I have recounted;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not abort, then make her sit on the siege, then study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and shape it according to natural form, and make her stretch out, and command her to take hold until the child comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the exit of the child from its neck, and having spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	it is necessary that the midwife holds onto her hand, then turns it back and forth, and gently guides;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then put on the natural musculage of oil and aloes, as we have said, then command her to move back and forth;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, then make her sit on the siege, and command her to take hold;
et la fai esternuer.	and make her stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the intestines
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes forth in this manner to the entire second stage, then cut the afterbirth with your finger, until the fluids are emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child bites its face and neck, then cut off the lips so they are not retained, and kill the child.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then wrap the child in it until you have put it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take care of herself sometimes:
adonques si istra legierement.	then if it starts to loosen slightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the exit of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes four at once;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live unless one can name them;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are torn apart by the womb which devours them, which is bound to the lips;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out naturally as one would expect, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are bruised, then do the treatment as we have said, and the doctor should be skillful, and make soon and lightly what he makes;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so that it may be for the salvation of the patient.
de plusors enfans	Of multiple children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Certain times are formed in the months I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to XV, and they are all shaped like an infant by the measurement of sage glory; and it is necessary that the doctor knows everything, because by chance similar things happen to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	and do as is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman after a dead or stillborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to do manual work;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	so that you know whether the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident or fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman sits upright on her back, and has her knees inclined downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should apply a poultice to the woman's back in two parts, or she be bound to bed so that she is not troubled by the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then smear the mouth of the mare with moist oils mixed with alti and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the bail's hands with these oils and these mixtures;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put them in the mare lightly, then take up or down as she puts on or off what is suitable to those things, and be careful if the child appears prepared to descend onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the cord presents in her eyes or in her neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then take hold or pinch it and adjust the sides accordingly;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	et covient qu'il tiengne l'oncine à sa main dextre, et mette la corbeure entre ses doigts de la sinestre main, et le boute à tout sa main légerement, et fiché l'oncine en aucun de ces lieux que nous avons dit, tant qu'il vienne à la chose vide;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and that is the shape of the tool:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then place it opposite another tool, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions be equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that the tools fit together, and the tool's teeth hold them in place, as is its form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part, then oil the nail of some of its fingers with oil, and grease that part, and draw out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there's no more of it, so put this cone or higher up, and do it until he gets out all the way.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and he cannot bring it back due to constriction, so you should wrap it on top with a cloth until it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then bind at the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the exit, or it has a sharp point assembled, so you should put the spatula-shaped spine between your thighs, and make the head and extract the liquid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you shape it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus likewise makes itself naturally great of head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with pincers, and if the head jumps out and it is held by the forceps, so that it is split, until the moisture which is in the wound is pulled out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces to whatever extent you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the mother is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strained in the belly or chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make an incision in the belly or chest until the moisture which is there runs out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, then thrust your hand into the depth of the wound, and pull it up to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then I apply one needle or two, and train him/her;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed because of an abscess that has come, then it is not necessary to work at all, but rather it is necessary to apply moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the applier applies ointments, and such things in water that are softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it equal, then apply what we have said to a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot do that, then train him/her by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if the applier applies what we have said to abscesses that come in the wound;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding comes from the wound, then it should be put in restraining water, and the applier should apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child in her womb had been dead, then she consulted another on top of it, and refused the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and caused great turmoil.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I sought the wound and treated it with many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman stayed like that for a long time, and thereupon a little pus came from it.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I do not remember this chapter except for the reason that, when a master finds a strange thing, he should know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	on restoring the mother to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Thereafter comes the form of the pressor, by which we use books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns to the two joints of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the beam should be one foot and a half in width, and the edge of the trees, one palm and a half long.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two ligaments there should be two gashes of the same beam, which are tight in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joints are fitted together in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, resembling it in subtlety and lightness, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have two joints, just like you see, one palm in length and two digits in width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the mare entirely with all the instrument, make the woman sit on it, her feet pendant and legs outstretched, then put the two joints together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the entire instrument, just like you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mare, until it does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all topped, and their likenesses are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the mirrors are prepared, then the work is done more quickly, and it is more suitable for people according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then have her exhale slowly, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she struggles for that reason, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then I take a pot and make a perforation or covering, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, casaline and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, being cooked or put in water above the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cord or pipe of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mother, and tie it so that the fumes come inside the mother;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then let her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine starts to move quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains after this treatment and is not well, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with muskadel from elderberry, and then pour it into her natural place, and make her rinse again.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it slowly and steadily so that the mother does not resist the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then pull;
si venra et se desaerdra.	so it will come out and be dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have said the remedy for vomiting, and fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she is not from all that we have said, so guard that you do not stray away.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marriage, you bind to the woman's hip, then anoint her with four-drug ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	so she will recover and be put back together, and will come forth.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nonetheless, when she recovers thus comes forth a bad smell from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So it is necessary to make suitable fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have tried fumigation with cabbage and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it looks like a chain, and you put the headpiece subtle in its natural state, and the large nails above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and make the fumigations above the coals, and let the itching continue until it is worn out, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Some children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle osseous fibers.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So then it is necessary for the needle to pierce that osseous fiber at its proper point, and not to penetrate excessively deep, and to guard the location so it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then an ointment treatment until he is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not close, then put in a perforation a piece of cloth, and leave it for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this stoppage occurs suddenly from a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	So then it is necessary to cover that stoppage:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	So he is cured, as we have said about the caustic.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger than those that come from above the foundation or in the space between two parts, whether one or more fistulas.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that swelling is old, it works, and with added moisture becomes white or subtle bluish, and sometimes these boils burst;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are followed by what comes out or is ejected through urine or flatulence when the patient has bowel movement, and sometimes jumps up accidentally.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the boils burst just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach just to the junction of the hip, and just to nothing of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the boil bursts at the fundament, and does not burst:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you thrust your index finger or fundament, and thrust a thin needle of iron or steel into the boil when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistiness, then you thrust a thin linen cloth or a horsehair into the boil as far as you can feel the cloth or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't come with defecation or vomiting or fever, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not break through;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists just to the bladder or just to the urethral conduit of urine, then the urine jumps out and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just to the joint of the hip, then the tendons come up to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain around it, then it is that he goes away slowly, and it is not worth medicine nor soothing by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have tried, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient lifts his legs down to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pitch a tent of earth, or of cloth if there is twistiness, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around his foundation, then you should put your two fingers there, and if he senses then that the tent has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and when it is discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh or skin, then know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not intervene there, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says however that some can be healed, but this is rare;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid one gives there is to cauterize the ulcer subtlety according to the width of the abscess, as was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and warm the poultice thoroughly in the fistula, until it reaches the foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these burnt remnants are like a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat with moist tents in butter, until the burnt remnants issue forth, and then treat with ointment, binding and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If that, in no other way, cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent is inserted and does not penetrate all the way to the docket which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of char or pus between your shoulder and the tent, and you see the fistula opening up where the covering meets the flesh;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	so scrape off the beginning of the fistula and insert it before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be freed the tent, and falls;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then remove those charred hairs that appear like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood swells up and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery brings together two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	namely, the burning away of these charred hairs, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat damp tents with butter or crushed charcoal, until the wound drips pus, and issue forth the burned hairs in the pus;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of scabby flesh that forms hard scales, and are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes right through to the fundament and is distant from the body, then place your thumb or fundament on it and investigate this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent and between two is the flesh or the scab or char, when it is close to piercing, unless there are fires that go by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	You cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the bone, or if you can, place tents and care for it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the dwelling that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come forth without intention.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then care for it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and then wash it since it has been cut beneath the foundation, or by tent or other appointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse that foul flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And no fistulas are formed in this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you set up the tent in the abscess, and it is on the outside of the foundation beneath the skin above, so take a piece of cloth with a perforation at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I wrap one thread twisted in two, and wrap the poultice all around the thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced on the edge of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that perforation, so that you set up your tent or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and draw the top of the thread, and tie the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it so that the thread cuts through the flesh between the two, and discharges.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then make it perforate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to cut open too deeply in the first instance, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatula-like spine that one makes for the abscess is much rougher on one side and cut away.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, because one does not strike what one must not strike, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Wounds are according to two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the foundation, like a kernel of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short time blood flows, and there is one or more, and they go below the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are below have little moisture, and in short time or a little of yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to sit down in a chamber until the foundations come forth, and then the sons appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and pinch it with pincers, or hold it to your nail, then strike at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligaments cannot hold them due to their moisture, so they take to drapery, or to cloth, or to a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder with some hot powders that are in place of a cauterizer;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, so you purge the patient with a biting and harsh purgative to clean what is in the foundation, so that it may come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the patient takes offense, and if the thread is too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and that you grasp them with your finger or with forceps, and cut, then cure as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he does not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	You must bring together the stitching according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and put it into an awl, then draw the thread above and make the awl pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the awl, so that they be of equal width.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and strain the thread tightly, then knot the thread, and pull out the awl, and do so with all the others, and let only a small amount of excess blood remain.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let him be until he has voided, and when they are done, treat him with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the burning of the skin or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times happens burning of the skin in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You must reset to the tip of a spatula or your fingernail's skin above, which does not let it get moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then cure it until it is solid as it is necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot dry, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until it heals slowly and is scraped off;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the tremble
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fomice is a small appearance of an abscess near the body, and goes very deep inside;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it bursts and becomes frosty, and one feels it just like a dead feeling of numbness, and spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is to take a cord made of goose quill or strong oxen hair, and put that cord on the numbness, until the circles purple the numbness entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the cordage until you coil it all around the trembling part, and put it in deep, and shake out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make it of a needle or iron according to this form, and be subtle underneath and drawing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, but rather hold steady at two [points], and press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, then cauterize the trembling part, just as it is shown in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	One never makes a poultice of silver or archwood, or of melted or powdered tin;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and one never makes any of these small and great instruments according to the manner in which they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether small or great, is as follows: the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if there is a deviation or the bowels are bound, as you see, and the head inside is pierced;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and has two holes on one side and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	et be the belly where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small holes, and have between each hole as much space as I should deserve, then put into these holes a strong thread of green silk twisted in X or in a circle, and tie up the belly so that it is like a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, bind it with the instrument before with a strong thread, then purge.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	and be the medicine not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purge with oil or almond oil or egg yolk or similar thing, then put it in slightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then press the ministers with both hands together until it is all empty, then pull out the purge, and lift up the patient's legs to the sky, and if the medicine wants to come out, so tighten it as much as it can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night, then there is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him in the illness of belly decoration, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, then the fistula is as subtle as for an infant.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and that is the form of the fistula which constrains the skin.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division, the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	and we will tell you the remedies by hand and by medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the places or locations where the wounds are made, and according to how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, cutting with sword and knife or lance or club or arrow or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder comes in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, so be careful if it's from stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is great, and you lightly doubt hot apostema.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	so make it heal quickly from the head itself if the wound comes forth with blood from the injury, and let the healing be contrary to the damaged part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and instruct the patient to be full of wine and thick meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it doesn't want to heal, then make his meat less, and don't let him drink wine, nor eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound if there comes a hot apostema, a moist cloth in rose oil alone, or in wine stiptic.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess hot, so he sets on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air or powder that I will say a little more later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the fire has moved it, so he sets on some unguents, until it is cleansed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great, such as a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot come together by stitches, then bring them together with stitching, just as I will say about belly wounds, by stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone and bleeds, and holds only by a small bit, then he should cut it off.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then he should treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find putrid flesh and it is not attached to the bone, then cut off all the putrid part, and pour away the pus, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be stopped by medications, then let the artery bleed, and if you find it severed, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and that you put this powder which unites as soon as the ashes have cooled.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take half a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	take three parts of gall and mix it subtly, apply the wound and bind it firmly until it is well healed and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then tie it well, and let it be without unwrapping, unless it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	because medicine is not abandoned until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with live coal only, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has disturbed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has changed the wound, even though it seems to be the same, do not put this powder on.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it runs clear.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you afterwards about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there being no difference between that and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the navel, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting on it, for it harms the navel and causes it to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the navel is cold and its continuance with it is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be thus mixed, as if chalz were washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and also washed the chalz in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist anointings.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, then cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is cut and full of pus, then pierce or make a deeper incision.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then close it, tie it, and cauterize as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is blocked, by which the flesh flows, then cut the gullet on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then restrain it properly, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so it seeks.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, so treat them all as well as you can and those that you cannot, leave until the wound has healed, and let the opening be closed up.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, so powder it with the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a lance or a sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, so examine whether there are signs of fever in the patient's pulse.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh to all its blood, so do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it at all for the blood that does not stay deep, but revives to the heart, and kills the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I mix an attractive ointment, and apply it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if it doesn't come to vomiting, nor evil trembling of the heart nor excessive sweating from fever.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it with tents and other remedies, until he is healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if she cannot heal, nor work, then know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	if you must do the cure as it should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a cut or slash of a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse on the back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If she is great, of sewing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if she is small, of powder; and if she is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then one should cover the wound, and apply fires to those that are severed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not severed, then let the wound remain to putrefy, so that it will ease the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and middle-sized and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes an intestine or a membrane of the intestines is torn, whereby their introduction is hindered;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the sewing is more troublesome, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one, therefore it is better to put in stitches gradually rather than all at once.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu'il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus à poinnes, et pour ceu vaut mieux les mouvoir li moieinne plaie, pour ceu c'on ramoine mues l'intestine à son lieu que aux autres II.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you should know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common wounds happen in the wound of the belly, and the wound of other body wounds and two other proper wounds are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and although they are more proper with the wound of the belly, I will say one by one and declare each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has come out, and a gentle thing is to be done, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are inflamed due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it up in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or cloth in hot water only, or cook one in boiling water with cypress and spikenard, and apply it to the intestines until the inflammation is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and at times make a wine restraining, and is good that has only one purpose to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the inflammation departing, then moisten the intestine with water or have it cooked with mullein and marshmallow, for by this is the entrance freed of almost all obstruction.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for cutting off hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first remedy is to put a bandage on as one would on a wound, so that no one should cut there unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for breaking:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts deep into the curvature and does not pass through, and you see where the shape is:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is expanded, and the intestines jump forth, then set it right again according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is on the part below the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is on the part below the belly, then put the head and breast higher than the parts below, and also when there is an ulcer of the belly in one of the two parts, put your intention so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Put what appears small on the wound, then have in your hands the miserable minister who holds all the rags at his hand, and gather the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and that is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound some space, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two keys of leather with the two keys of siphac, which is underneath the leather inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two heads of siphac together fourfold.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then strain with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then gather the two edges of the wound properly, and then leave some space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread of the string just as you made the first needle, and do not stop making needles according to what you need them for until all wounds are restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be moderate, between fine and thick, for the fine needles pierce through all flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore it is necessary that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it does not behoove to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and work the wound before the healing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut off the ends of the needles, lest they disturb the patient while sleeping, and put threads or cloths on the ends of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them like that until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second suture is common, and it is that you join the two buttons of leather and the two buttons of skin together with a needle where there is one strong thread in between;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these buttons all four together, then withdraw the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews cloth;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each suture the thickness of a minor denier;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this suture is good for men, and I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm long, and the intestines were two palms long, and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was closed in just 15 days, and I cared for it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find any, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put gauze on top of the wound two times a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and sew it from the outer part to the inner part;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the corner in a straight line, then take the end of the thread or suture and pass it through to the other side of the inner part up to the outer part.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this suture is that you should sew as the furrier makes pelts, and that you leave once the thread on one side and pick it up again on the other, until the suture is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of suture, which Galen says is proper, is such that some people do who assemble the two parts together naturally, and tie one end of the thread to another end in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Pierce an arrow or the tip of a needle nearby, and make it pierce only that point, and leave the two joints of the skin.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part up to that point inside, through the two joints of the skin.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make it pierce one and then the other from the outer part up to that point inside, in two other joints of the skin that are on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most natural way of stitching and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galens says this same thing, and many testify to it, so one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and knows that when the rupture is within the belly, so is the cutting more grievous than at other places in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and if the burn has changed it, then restore the intestines, and the cloth;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put powder on top of raw flesh, and if the burn has changed it, then put on any salve that is available, until the wound closes;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew the thread, and join the stitches, and the threads;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it starts to close, old cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	You don't need any other medicine for many injuries when the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not cause community with the main members, it is necessary to apply a small amount of linden oil at warm temperature, or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and below the shoulders.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or purging in the bowels, and it happens many times, then purge with black wine tea, and similarly if the purging comes just to the intestine.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and let it penetrate inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the plantiness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to its nature from the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the hernia jumps from the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and becomes green or black, then you must tie the part that is black, so that blood does not flow there, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then tie up what is between the ligament, and place the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until it reaches the end to ease extraction when the splints fall, and the wound is bound.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some people, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly with a spear.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was diarrhea and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him accordingly as I could, and did not cease to refine the treatment until he was healed, and the abscess closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it close, I feared that the patient had a bad thing in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better condition, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters say that when one has a small wound in the intestine, he should be tied in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take fresh from great stones, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the plaster has opened the mouth, so put it on the two lips, so that it stretches its mouth up.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then bind the head, and it will stay so that he cannot undo it, then put another plaster after in that manner as before, until the wound is completely covered.
et cout la plaie.	and bandage the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the thread is applied to the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is made from an animal's intestine, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this thread of intestine that is well separated, and then tie at the end of this thread a thin linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and bind the intestine, and pull it back into its place.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of sewing of flesh is not far from according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no reason or health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whatever
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it breaks open and runs down.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the greenish nodulation, hard and white, or where one does not feel pain, and it is also shorn like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear bowel, and at other times thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes thin, and at other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, except it is through one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the littleness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	because of his wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and above the lips, which does not allow for new flesh to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	because there is too much fat.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the skin is rotten and the matter is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region delays digestion, and delays health, and flows by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in every member of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the sinew, or from the intestine, or from the bladder, or from some of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the property of the main member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the abscesses that are in this manner are of severe healing, and there is nothing but hard work, and lack of understanding;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any abscess that does not come just to the place I said, and you have faith in the cure, and you recognize it, take a tent of earth or iron, if the abscess is straight, then dig.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the abscess is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of lead, because the lead bends and wraps around the twistiness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the abscess has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings, because the moisture is so short from one opening to another, and it purifies.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then proceed with bleeding according to your skill, knowing if there is bone or nerve; and take note of the depth; and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press on his arm with your hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the false humors and corrupted matter that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then continue the treatment until it is healed, and if the fistula is well-filled with right matter, then it is necessary that you cut deep, as far as you can, then insert moist compresses in medicine aloe, and bind them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine may corrode the superfluity that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then you apply poultices to the healthy skin, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it's not healed by that, then you cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the abscess, then you excise.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerve does not grieve or main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then you scrape it away until all the corruption is removed, then treat with poultices on the healthy skin until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it's not healed and returns to its previous state as before, know that you are not yet at the end;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	so uncover and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then set it back in its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it's thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep inside, that you cannot come there.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy except from the natural course of things;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can draw it out with forceps, then draw it out with an instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, then pull all of them out, without leaving even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it difficult for you, and there is no error or fear, then cut through the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound a poultice causing putridity, and leave it until the pus has formed around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as one from the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackened flesh is gone, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of corruption in it, and comes just to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	so it should be washed and covered all the way to the corruption, and then it should be cured until it is bound together;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to a reason that came from within the body, so that the matter came out at the leg and became swollen with a big abscess, and there was no other way but to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctor, through their foolishness, overlapped so much that the abscess opened, and a lot of matter flowed out, and became a fistula, and there came a lot of pus that all poured down and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many doctors had taken care of him for two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands, until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed through the pores to great profit.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red the body of the youth, and had a citron color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of those tubules, and then searched all the tubules, and found that some were coming together in front of each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened then, and cut into one of the pores as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for that which I had removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with medicines over a long time, and could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then removed it, and thought to close the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I couldn't bear to touch it except around a palm of bone, and the wound went all the way to its marrow, then I restored it with medications.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he was healed and sound quickly, and it did not require further work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure, and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because of the blood evacuation it often happened that one was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh arose, and it had good disposition and caused no harm or opposition whatsoever, neither when going up nor when coming down.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set thus:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a linen and strain it to the open end of the bone, and have someone stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another linen strip, a bit thicker than the first one, and tie it on top of the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch it upwards, so that you pull away the rotten flesh below, and uncover the flesh above where you want to set the bone, so that the bone does not harm the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot iron or a heated tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to clean as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to clean again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place a hot iron underneath, and then clean out the corruption from one part to another, and be sure to clean up as much of the long side of the corruption as possible, just as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and clean the bone where it contains from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cut.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the fingernail of the hand or the toenail, it is very strong that thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and sutures for covering those bones are many, according to the structure of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you think about the instrument you need according to what it is suitable for.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder can be dislocated due to a cause inside or due to a cause outside.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have tried medicine to cure the corruption by treating with medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil, which is the loss of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and afterwards it appears to be inflamed, then this corruption spreads from member to member, and takes hold throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	So hasten to apply a covering, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar ones, if the corruption is in the head of the foot, then cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, so cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, so cut at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, that's deadly, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and so it does when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then cut all the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it mounts up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die from lack of treatment;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one minister down and another up, and you detach the flesh which is between the two ties with a spatula wide enough to reveal the bone;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then the surgeon takes the thread or silk, and places a linen cloth on each side of it, so that the thread does not touch the healthy skin, and another lesion and abscess will come to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs while you work, then cauterize the wound hastily, or apply some restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to him at that time:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he got a boil which seemed like burning fire, and that ulcer came first in his foot of the leg, until it consumed the whole leg.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the ulcer, he hastened to cover the leg, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long time after it returned to him the corrosion or boil of the hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things responsive after the purification of the body, and he could not cease from the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of causing the matter to recur;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the vital force of the man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became desperate entirely, and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and he was cured;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I don't know this story except because it is done on occasion when one has need of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess ever comes to the fatty part of the body and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they roast and pierce, and the bowstring snaps, and the light remains white, just as with vassals.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is just as subtle as delicate drapery, and they do not run right to the bone, nor right to the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain", and are not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone or very close, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you cut all around it, and just as with delicate drapery;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is full of flesh, then treat it with a poultice thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the breasts are large, and the bowels which follow are of a foul smell, then use the Egyptian medicine that is prepared thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take lard, and oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and put them to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take of this mixture according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as a pessary for the breast, and restrain the hernia.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain for two hours, then strain it out saying.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breasts are cleansed, and the foul odor is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and at no time use the water of ashes when this medicine is present, and it is that you take ash of vine wood, and pour water over it, then let it settle, and strain it, as long as you know that the breasts are well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor Egyptian medicine nor ash water, so they liquefy with water and honey or add a little bit of lard.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you liquefy with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property to purify and cleanse, and the wine makes the blood flow.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are sure that the skin is well purified, then liquefy with what brings forth flesh in it, and it is that you take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you liquefy with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or to treat with ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the boil on the skin is small, and the catheter of the liquefaction cannot enter it, so you enlarge it with a little iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, so that only a small area at the edge or in the cleft can enter, and the purulent discharge that flows is above, then cut or move it below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the pus is very deep, so that no flesh remains to become infected.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cut the skin below as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the pus flows down to the lowest part where it is, for when the pus is very deep, so that no flesh remains to become infected and if you cannot cut the skin below as you see fit, arrange it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the pus flows slowly down, and do not leave anything of the pus.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidative medicines to cover the wound, and place a cloth made of linen that covers all the wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	After the wound in the breast area becomes larger than the first one, then apply ointment so that it is soft on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound in the breast to relieve the bowstring, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one who is on top of the wound in the breast area takes it away often to relieve the bowstring, and knows what comes from the bowstring, whether it's venom or pus or enough or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see nature bursting forth on the wound of the breast, then know that the breasts are already healing, and approaching health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning or the third day, and when you open the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts discharge undigested breast after many days, know that the breasts are not hardened.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all of health, for the health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	There are men who tarry unnecessarily with pitch in their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if his stomach is indignant, it jumps out of his chest after many days, know that his chest will not heal;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if his chest is slow to heal and is far away, then add medicines that are wet in substance and dry in virtue, as ointment defines, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it's the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and make the same thing with cooked honey, when defined ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then in the cloth I apply a poultice, and stretch it over the chest, and sometimes administer a remedy that is aristolongue long, and roots of lysis celestial, which is also like flour of violets and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make powder, and put the honey I said on it, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts of the limb, or in the tendons;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if it is a wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the thumb.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panniculus is an abscess that arises under the inguen of the armpit of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected and one does not take care, so the abscess becomes inflamed, and runs and discharges pus as long as it will run its root to the bone, and by chance all.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes to the corrosion just to the bone, as long as it brings stinking pain, and is the shoulder joint wide, and is the color red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary to remove all the superfluous flesh that remains of the finger, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick and bleed, it is necessary that you put a bandage under the nail that pricks the flesh, and bind it tight above, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, so cut it, and remove the flesh, for as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the joint being corrupted, so cut into it as before said, then care for it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and he feels great pain, so you must heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the swelling on top of the spindle-shaped abscess by cutting across it, and be careful that the knife does not come to the flesh which is underneath the swelling, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes;
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The vertebrae which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshly, and by chance there is one or it has bones, and sometimes it has an angle, and one of these is born at the root of the jointure, or the birth is in some of the vertebra.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born in any part of the joint does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the joint moves by chance;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of one who is fat is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the measurement is taken from the root of a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born in the root of the joint is grievous to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if it holds too tight.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or has it in the back night, you should first cut away the fat around to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable thread for them, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sores that come to the toes together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you need to repair that wound, so that it should be restored according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or wet cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is sewn, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sores come to any of his toes with the palm, then cut off that sore as is necessary.
des vils	of evil people
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Vessels are swollen and greatly inflamed with excessive melancholic humors that come to many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer to them sometimes purging with oil of cole, and then the remedy of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The ironing cure is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is how they bleed, and draw out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other manner is that you open a vein, and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, rise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the great blood is thinned, then strain the patient's leg from above the hock joint to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place or two or three, with a wide incision, then lift and drain completely the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's virtues can withstand.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and command that he hold off eating meat until black blood flows freely;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommence evacuation and cleansing when the veins are empty, and it is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies for him are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	wash the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs, then put him in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and fill the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat him by the fire, and then cut into the vein at the long part of the thigh or in the area below the knee;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then apply ointment to the wound, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you touch;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	After placing the splint below, so that it is raised from the skin, and then bend it to a light angle, and then place it in another position above three folds.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then skin the flesh above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the splint, just as you did, and bend it to another angle, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut to the joint of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second angle.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then stretch it from angle to angle, until it is all loose, then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you can't pull and lift it, then put an awl on all the strong doubled thread, and tie and pull, and put below the splint, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and guard lest she copes, for if she copes, one cannot then draw or lift her, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it all, put a moist cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the location of the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for him until he is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and bent together, and it's not straight, as we said, then you must cut it irregularly, but don't block it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it can open the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is set in legs, in hot places where there are no herbs or tree, and on land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it is elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the corruption that comes from below the skin, as serpents and worms are born inside the body and are set between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this flux are that it comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the pustules change, and the flux begins to come out, just as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one foot and a half to two feet, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it becomes inflamed again, wrap it around the cloth, and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root until it is entirely removed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, so it enters into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and inflammation where it is, and a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for which reason it is necessary to treat it little by little up to the head, and leave nothing behind in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it sometimes happens that this vein when treated with ten or twenty palms in length, and one man came to me, whose was twenty palms long, and when you cut it, so it bursts forth or becomes a perforation, and the incision goes all the way down to the bottom, so that everything flows out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and the matter inside is emptied, and bring back to its place medicines that prevent inflammation any day, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes at this vein many streams flow forth, and even when it opens up in the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out a great deal of pus, and from which it leaps.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Heal then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Veins that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This illness is called in our land "disease of oxen", because it often afflicts oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body rising and falling, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it bursts the skin where it goes, and jumps forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by some bad humors, such as those that come from venomous creatures, worms, and lice or ascarids in the stomach.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot escape except when it moves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If it is necessary then tie the place above and below with a strong cord tightly, then strike upon it and treat it well, and if the vein is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it bursts.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it causes is that it runs to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, then hold a small circle firmly below it, then strike upon it and treat it well;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient with cleansing of the body by soluble medicines for wicked humors, and beware of unwholesome foods that cause corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and after that, I saw it rising as quickly as a worm on the shoulder, even sooner than anything, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later it ran throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was circling around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had always thought that the pain would move from one place to another, but I did not see it, just as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were uncovered, and because of this the appearance of forced constriction appeared.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are healthy, and who have moist bodies and veins responded.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then bind it above and below hastily, and then strike on top so that those vapors are constrained to return.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the joint;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it to your eyes, then use the remedy of those who restrain vapors, such as stinking pills, and viper pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their kind is that there are those who have great points, small ones, and bearded, and soldered.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those who have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those which are in pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls in any member if it falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in principal members such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you next, warn you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many dispositions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not very deep, then treat it, and care for the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps the sphenoid which is above the brain, is when it causes scotoma, swelling, vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perchance it lacks force of the nostrils, or of the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it affects the speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps out of the white moist wound like pustules, and similarly bursts forth as if in a boil;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if you notice this sign, then hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it is stuck in the heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were driven into something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow becomes motionless like boils, and with dark bloody discharge, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and a fainting spell.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know with certainty that death is impending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that strikes the liver is that without foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and he sighs high and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow hits in the covering of the chest, then it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it gives great alarm and great pain and sighs;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the belly, and bursts forth a small amount of pus through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels very much pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	knows that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulders and the shoulder blade and the spine of the back and the nape and the hips and the knees and the feet, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man whose arrow hit the well in the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and pulled it out on the other side under the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I pulled out an arrow that had hit in the fat of the eye under the paper underneath, and the arrow was bent, and could not be pulled out except for the point towards it, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bowstring, easy to pull without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The patient was healed, and no bad accident befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And extract an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrowhead is Arabic-tipped at the ear.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I extracted the splinter, and refined it to such an extent that I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And extract an arrow from a man whose belly had been pierced by it, and who thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then, after passing thirty days, his condition did not change at all.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrowhead, and extracted it, and pulled it out, without any bad accident occurring.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if the man to whom an arrow fell on his back has a wound that is stitched up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrowhead remained inside him, and his natural disposition did not change at all, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and was stitched the wound.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And treated an arrow wound on the king's man, who had been hit in the leg and was slightly bent to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was fully embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the treatment after it had been struck three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched for it in every subtle manner and did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt piercing and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I applied a poultice on the spot to attract and digest, because the swelling did not grow.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the bowstring of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the ointment on it many days, and healed the wound above, and so the patient remained long, until he felt the arrow one day inside his house.
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound a medicinal agent with corrosive properties for many days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was fixed in its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I pressed into the opening of the wound with that medicinal agent, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it crossed the boundaries for about 4 months, and then it abscessed so that I put in forceps, and pulled it from one side and the other, and could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then I did not cease to invent and devise various ways of instruments, until I took it the next day with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I carried it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot restore:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care in what I do not say, for books cannot take it all;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters compare a little with a great thing, and find nine works and nine instruments for the descending of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not exit the limbs where they are fixed except by two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the entry point where they enter, or through another place;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out by the side where it enters is an arrow entering a fatty organ, and sometimes it jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it until the fat is cleared around, and loosen the exit point;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then leave it like that for some days, and move each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't jump out, then pierce around with a very fine instrument, until the surrounding fat is widened, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the skull bone and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said befall the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If one does not pull it out, but leaves it until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow comes so close that it breaks through, it is deadly.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come close to the sacral bone, and the patient remains some days without a bad accident, then it is expedient to pull out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very well embedded and cannot come out further, then administer herbs around, as I told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is stuck in the body and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound becomes large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck for two parts up to where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully make sure you don't break the arrow, but rather draw it more tightly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't all at once, then leave it until the flesh around is melted, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flowing of blood makes you opposed, then follow what we have said in its chapter about the treatment.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and consider how you can pull out the arrow without danger, either soon or late, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do so, then put him as the signs show you should.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another side, if it leaves anything of itself behind, or the skin is swollen where one can see or sense it.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot come out, then let her stay a bit longer and then start extracting again until she comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is stuck in it, then push it all the way through.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrow falls, and you see fit to administer poultice, then administer an instrument that is hairy, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push through, and if the arrow is stuck, then push the instrument with the entering point into it, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, so you should cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it needs to be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or breaks or is in the stomach or bladder or chest, and it is nearby, and you can cover over it, then cover it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, small, and tiny, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the plumage of a bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the forceps for pushing and for pulling out if it is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins for healing, out of which sixteen are in the head, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the "herbech" pair;
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and two arteries that are in both temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the inner corners of both eyes, which are called "aspirés";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the neck;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and two veins that are in the throat;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and two veins that are on the upper lip above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins which we commonly use are those in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people commonly call it "the vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "femoral", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and people commonly call it "the vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and people commonly call it "the vein of the belly", and it is above the fibula, and it is that one which we use when bleeding, which opens up clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the wrist and the ankle, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is under the curvature of the pouch of the left side, and the second is at the ankle of the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nesse" that is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps the ancient cathars and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the bleeding is such as I tell you, and it is that you lift the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a string, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	which then returns to your thumb, and where you feel the pulsation below your thumb, then press down;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and thrust it under the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand up to all of the vein above, and cut and loosen the skin and the vein well so that you can traverse it, and make blood come out until you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and bind it, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The veins of the two arteries that are in the two temples, are worth for an old headache, and sode, and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the eyes that are filled with aged tears.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the blood are such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, until the two veins appear openly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse below your shoulder, and then signs to cease;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the key on the vein above to your two fingers, and put the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up and cut it, just as you did in two other veins, and make the wound bleed according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then bind it firmly, and let it be until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein on the forehead is worth just as much as the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, ancient migraines, and rashes.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patient strains his neck in twisting, until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossor", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let two drops of blood come out according to how much you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is well-bled and not once does a wide flame appear.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it is not fitting that the flames be too large;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and let it bleed across, because the bone is near, and by chance break the blood flow when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The blood from the two veins that are in the armpits so helps the eyes, and the pustule, and the rubor, and the oriel in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their blood is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some ligament, just as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then health, and let the wound be of the traverse, a little bit long of the flame, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they will break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a bandage of blood, as much as you need it, and then bind on cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood of the vein of the neck is valuable for ague, and for excessive sweating, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the blood is that the patient strangles his neck, then strains his head to the left hand side, and takes the subtle long flame, and inserts it into the gap between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too far into depth, and make a bandage with blood according to your necessity, then tie it for one night, because it is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sap of the two gum trees greatly helps in the tightening of the vein, and at the beginning of inflammation, and with many diseases, and with swelling, and with corrosion, and with sores, and boils;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the sap is that the patient stretches their neck between one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient take a seat, then open the vein of the long one a little bit wide, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then repair the other side on the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and hold it gently with moderate pressure so that the patient does not choke;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let him be until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the healing of books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The vein of the veins above the lips so helps in bleeding in the mouth, and in corruption of gums, and splits in lips, and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their black color and by the small black veins around them;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then cut one and the other, and if you don't recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the thicker one on each side, and do the same with both veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the healing below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The wound of the veins that are under the tongue so helps after the wounding of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and with mouth diseases, and with eye diseases.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the wounder are that the patient takes between your hands before the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and gazes downward in each corner at a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	heal then both of them, and do not go too far into the depth, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the throat that are commonly cured are cured in two manners:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with a blow of all the flame mercurial large, or olive subtle as cutters cutting, and it is called "anasil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fine gash is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to have a device for opening veins which are full of thick blood that appears on the surface and contain thick blood and turmoil.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of olive oil.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, and at the neck, and at the breast, and at the belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed profusely, and to beware of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a great flow of blood comes forth, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not pierce the flame, but rather cut as with a sickle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary that you manipulate it, and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	where you want any blood to come from him, or you let a vein open up in his arm instead:
elle apert manifestement;	it appears obviously;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the skin of the ankle is numb, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of incision, and then bind the arm, and open up the vein at the numb ankle.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and watch that you do not hit the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is of the artery:
eschui la donques.	then avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it come out at the top like a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Hurry then, and place your knife on lengthwise, then remove your knife when the blood is still, as it often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	if he takes up his arm, and leaves it thus, and does not move the patient's arm;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be on fear, and do not move the patient until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood is not staunched, and he complains, and medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the vessel will shrink.
et estainche li sans.	and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a wrapping of linen, and cut it, and take one half and bind it on well until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the bleeding stops, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the swelling is not at all diminished in many dispositions due to the small size of the wound, and the force of the ligament of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the arm is so well-aided that it bleeds from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too deep, he will find the nerve, and it will swell and the bleeding will cease, and by chance cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in certain men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you close the veins with the instrument anusil.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid hitting the nerve at your peril.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgical treatment of the cephalic vein helps, which draws blood from the head and assists with healing.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to bleed into the olive vein or the myrtle vein, for this is the most saving of all veins, because there are no nerves nor arteries beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter place, and do not distress anything if it does not work the first time, and one recommences.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the places swell in some people, when one tries the first time, but it does not distress anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is ordered only to preserve health and to forestall future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are on the forehead:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	It is to know, cephalic, swift, and basilica;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should purify oneself at the beginning of prayer in summer, and after eating in autumn and winter when signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should purify oneself on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The purification that is administered against diseases has no fixed duration, but whenever need arises by day or night, in all hours and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to purify children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit except for less than seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly who have passed 60 years not be cauterized.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wants to purify themselves, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema, if they have many retained farts, so that the veins do not attract superfluous substances from the intestines which are harmful to the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	That which is too full of meats does not heal well, nor one who is drunk, until he is sober again, nor dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And one does not heal well after passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequenting with women, and toil, watching, and worrying, and all that comes from a fault in virtue, or through something of arm or body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then balance the humors, if the blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter a bath, if nothing hinders you, to subtlety the blood, and to heal the wound around the third rib, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep that day free from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be calm and joyful, and let the surgeon be higher than the one being operated on, and stroke the arm two or three times, then loosen the ligament above gradually, because when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then stroke the joint with hands, until the veins swell, and feel it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the surgeon's hand with an old piece of oil, then put his left hand's thumb on the vein below the joint a little bit where he wants to cut, so that the vein does not collapse and fail from being cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like strings to the surgeon, and those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the flame upon them, the flame retires, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with such people.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein is opened too much, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the surgeons be informed about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then it recommences again a little below or above that place, if the swelling is not present.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the swelling is present and the patient is frightened, let it stay one or two days and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	in case an abscess may form;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter the bath, then the healing begins again if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you see, then trust in that same wound to flow right throughout.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work with some haste, yet when the swelling subsides;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for it often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the joint swelling, do not recommence the bleeding, and put on a little bit of oil, for it lightens the body's blood, and is good in this joint with the mixture of oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil mixture to each wound that you treat veins for to stem the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and the same thing is done with a triangle and a bow of eyes when one puts it on the joint;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so that the blood flows and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a great abscess, which often happens especially when it is not cleansed except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, so hasten and put on the joint a moist sponge in water and a little warm, and restrain it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains at its place for several days with no blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on top something of aloes or myrrh mixed with camphor, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there occurs abscess and swelling at the joint of the temple.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	put then your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad swelling.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore do not put on top anything of what we have said, for by chance there is a cut short of the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make it dry with an embalming agent to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	Since the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see pus, let it drain off until it becomes subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the person who is weak and feeble, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and have the incisions wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for someone who is feeble, do the opposite, and make them well gradually and often, and one should heal them by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this way of healing is preserved from the disfigurement of blood and the compression of nerves, and it is more effective than the healing of a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the person whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in apple juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is fevered, treat with blood three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, bleed him before the surgery and use a moist poultice in a sweet syrup, or in a syrup of aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he beats on the vein, after a lot of blood has come out, it is necessary that he drinks pottage made from bones, and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to blow on his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to blow on his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal on another side, then should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body that is already fevered, and it brings on a fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it needs to be bled out in large quantities, and to dilate the pore so that it can reach as far as the navel;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you will reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse as he recovers, so that death does not come in lieu of navel, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it's not necessary when you see loosen the arm, and make blood come out the second time, and the pore is closed, that you press strongly there;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is bent, let him stretch out his arm quickly, for it would be wrong.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him leave it until it heals the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you puncture at the tip of the flame until the blood that has congealed comes out through the vein and put a poultice on it and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity demands drawing out blood a second time, then let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is healed at the site of the wound because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the scab is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind it moderately so that the vein opens well, then heal it now by piercing across, not along or lengthwise.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the wound be wide, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood does not come out, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in winter, then do not put the hand in hot water at all, for it stays colder than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein of this wound is safer than all other wounds, for there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the gallbladder on the right hand side is worth more than all other diseases of the liver, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is emptied, if one sees it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein crosses over, and you cut it from end to end, then nothing will hurt.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and don't go too far in depth, for the nerves are underneath all the stripped flesh, and then put the hand in hot water if the abscess is frozen in the wound and can't come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled the blood as much as is needed, then put oil and seal on the vein to close it quickly, and do the same with each section.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The wound on the left hand side is worth as much to the disease of mice as it is to the illness of the right side; and does just as I told you there.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wound of the Sophene is worth to all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of his urine are such that the patient pours their foot into hot water, and rubs on the vein until it bleeds, and lies above the ankle joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot they go out much water.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then the urine will be either more abundant or larger drops or at the ankle, which is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you take the urine from the foot, then beware of the worms that are below, and the urine should also pass as it is in cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the urine fails the first time, then it should start again a little above, because the bone is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	nor doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same to the other foot in equal manner.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its incision is worth to the pain of the haunch when it's for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the qualities of his blood are such that the patient goes into a bath and strains above the ankle four times while twisting, because otherwise the vein does not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, let blood flow in all ways that you can, and crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and be careful to stop it, for the wound is clean, and it has been opened to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not stop it, let blood flow from the part that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and take care of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let as much blood flow as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on a cloth and bind it tightly;
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of purgations by suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Poultices are made from horns, or earth, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventosity is done in two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventosity which is without wounding is done in two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is all fire, or not on fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventosity which is done by wounding and drawing blood is done in 14 parts of the body, one of which is all on the top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventosity below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventosity between the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventosity above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the ventosities in both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the ventosities in both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the poultices of the two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the bleeding is not treated with blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it has not weakened anyone much, just as one does when treating a wound;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habits, then we should administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who become replete and ruddy in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darken around the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are bleeding;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such people who think, and see by looking at blood and injured and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it's during the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The mixture of the medicine helps with the headache that comes to the eyes and does not belong after the evacuation of the whole body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this purgation is instead of the medicine for the head, and does not belong to someone who has a cold complexion or has cathartic, for it would do them very great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it does not belong to the elderly or those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, and because of this it's necessary to put the venesection a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The purgation in the neck is instead of the medicine for the head and the throat, and therefore it is good for constriction of the belly, and for opening of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to press gently, for if she holds too tightly, so one incurs obstruction of the bowel or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The vapors of the two chest cavities of the neck are equal to the pains of the head, and obtalmia and emigration, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the health of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch out their hand to put down, lest they compress the artery and let forth streams of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The vapors below the chin are equal to sickness of the mouth, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The venesections of the shoulders are worth for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The vapors of the sides are equal to those of three veins of the arm, for they bring forth blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply by fontanelle, for the bones are full of flesh, and there is knowledge below nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The poultice that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the poultice be large and made of earth, so that it can do well in drawing.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if she were subtle, she would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The poultices of the legs are very good, for they draw blood from all the body, and are valuable for old pains in the reins, and kidneys, and bladder, and restore flowers.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in place of the two soffens, and the two shins, and yet they enfeeble the body after long use, and bring forth faintness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to put the poultice is that you put it first empty, and then suck it temporarily, and put it quickly, and move it equally, and do not stop doing so, until you see the red place and swollen, and appear the red of blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then be bold, and put on poultices, and take heed of the condition of bodies, for there are some who have tough flesh, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to wound only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one a little deep.
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to wound twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtlety open the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to wound a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out a little blood little by little, if we can only suffer it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, if we often start again;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, then pierce it deep, and make sure that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have hard skin and are robust, with numerous pores, that you anoint the sores of the oil drops which are appetizing and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed of cucumber oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in winter, with oil of wormwood, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is large and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person has tender skin and large pores, there is no need to put oil on them, but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And the one who has much moisture, should rise up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive swelling rise from old wine, or water of sycamore, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it does not become well without a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it does not sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be poulticed and when he is being poulticed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of him who is healing is choleric, and his blood is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	so it is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranate seeds and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink a little, and hare's flesh, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, so take honey syrup, and scented wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and drink little, and drink a little, and eat small birds and small capon.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and when he gets winded, so must he drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the ventosation, or after, to comfort the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be thinned out, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses that are applied without hurting are those that are applied on the liver, and on the belly, and podagra, and on the stomach and bowels and reins and hip, for those members do not tolerate being hurt elsewhere, and one does it only to draw blood from member to member, just as we apply them to the breasts when milk flows.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we apply cupping glasses to the stomach and bowels to reduce the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and stops the pain when there is ulceration or stone, if it stops by its attractive virtue by chance the ulceration, or removes the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these poultices are administered empty so that they suck only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain water, as in diseases of the eyes, and in such a way one fills the poultice with hot water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two fingers and a half palm long, and have on the edge around the middle one small pit, like to lodge an awl, and be of clay, soft before so that it does not wound the patient when putting it on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and it should have in the middle a rod of cross-sectioned clay or iron, to put a candle holder on, and great and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for children's poultices are different from old people's, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus put this poultice on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the candle of wax or linen, and put it in the poultice across the rod that is in the poultice, so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice that it may not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and it should be on the ulcer that we have said, so that when you want, if there is moisture, and one removes the poultice;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the linen as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass therefore which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, all aquosity, has no horn nor pierce, and is not administered more than once when it is full of aquosity, and is placed on the member so only;
et c’est li forme:	and that is the shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Cups are not administered more than once except in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bony limbs stripped of flesh, such as the head or neck, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find cups that are in sweet and clear water without perturbation, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put one in sweet water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then let it be bled with vein and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clean and dry, if it is a place where you can put a poultice, then put one there, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb slightly and then with water, very well, and then tighten it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the swelling heals too late after the application of bandages, soak a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the swelling is reduced.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the swelling is multiple, put on crushed Vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is reduced.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put a handful of peeled peas on the limb and let them stick to it until they are dry, which will stop it now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more supplies, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and if the bandages don't want to take, wipe the fresh blood on the wound, or stick an awl in until the blood flows out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling off, powder on a small amount of alum and salt or ashes, so they will stick now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish men will despise this chapter, for they have never seen anything like it in the ancient books nor read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason is strange the science in our land, for I never found any good;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, and I have described to you what is contained in this chapter
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue to this book, the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who have been proved may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, then it is necessary to hasten to heal the sick person from one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is not very cold, or too hot;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and to abate cold cholers, that is to say, cold joints, and hare's flesh and deer's flesh, and not drink wine, nor eat fat meats, and not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of hot aposteme, or spreading of matter in the member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	so that the patient may recover under their previous government, as they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with flesh that makes good nourishment, or if they have viscosity, as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and peas, and pork belly, and sheep's fat, and fresh fish, and big wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For good nourishment quickly heals the wound and the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set or united according to their nature because of the wasting away of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no care, reset on the broken bone with large clamps that bind and join the member together, until it becomes strong again as before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not leave him from his work, and for that reason he must be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is one thing, and the fracture of the breast or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that occur in a rounded shape, and others in a curved one, like the cut of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with wound, and fracture into a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each person should have their own instrument and proper tool in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the breaking of the bone is known by what the joint is twisted, and it opens well through a gap, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twistiness nor creaking, and the patient does not feel great pain, since there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twistiness, or a split, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So do not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come later, and then restrain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage that goes in an arm, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them together evenly, so that abscesses do not come to life.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses arise, he should leave it alone for a day, until the abscess is pacified;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it back together evenly as you can lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of one who has pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then bind it, as is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and they stretch from two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or at your hand it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and to your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you will join them by all means with their places as best you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not come to harm or pain.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and set the two bones of the skull according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And he feels well with his hand if it seems to him that it is not well.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	so that it is set straight and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who bring them about by their abscessed work heat and contraction to the member, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is fixed, then punish the patient well so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, nor turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet fixed, and it must be put in such a condition that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set straightly, lest twistedness comes to pass when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as wrists and thumbs and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is necessary to wrap soft and subtle linen drapes.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: so it is necessary to wrap with a wide and strong bandage, for the broad bandages encircle the whole great member and restrain it evenly from all sides, so that there is no crease.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then bind around with light bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and strain your hand a little on all the bandage, then go up above the break and bind it less, so that the break will soon move away from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you take hold of a great part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken member.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the break, and strain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first chapter above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the stitches strips of linen or cloths, until it is entirely even, then tie all above with bandages, and then put well-made bands on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has swelling or abscess, then put something soothing and hot on top that removes the swelling, and let it be like that for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain on top of the bands, and be made of a quarter of a well-waxed cane, or of fir wood from which one makes nails, or of palm sapwood, and be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the band that you put on top of the break is a bit bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as is necessary for the member of small or great size;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then steady it above the stars just as you did at the first joint, then place a thread smoothly above the scar;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is above, the looser below;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be middle-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of those who make their joints from twisted linen threads, and it's a great error, for the joint cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not necessary that there be less than a span between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the straining in their healthy skin, then put underneath them linen cloths or chopped wool, so that he does not get injured.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage and the ligaments are torn, I will say the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to bind with splints all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is large, it is not necessary to place stars more than after IV or VII days, or more according to your security and depending on the heat of the abscess.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here is the way of ancient poultices to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that is left over from the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, to use, and this is the common manner of the poultice restoring breakage in various ways, and likewise for women and little children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of poultice restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take aloes and ladanum and balsamum and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrrh, in the proportion of one to ten.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, in the proportion of one to five;
alechil VIIII З.;	aloe eight times;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make powder, and mix with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restore broken bones, and is worth to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another manner of plaster that is good for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mugwort and balm of meadow;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	mirror and aloe, to the amount of nine [parts];
acaice VI З.;	acacia, to the amount of six [parts];
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	bolic Armenian, to the amount of ten [parts], and grind it well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another manner of plaster for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and soothes the pain that occurs, and they use it to shape the bone, and to break the brisement:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new linen, and boil it in ash and oil, and put it on the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried leaves of fig tree and earth leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of bone breakage and to ease the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each a part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix it with moist water of coriander or water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster, stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take the root of wormwood, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each a part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and mix with saltwater or sweet water or with wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken limb to restore it anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things slightly hot and dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to plaster that is worth for wound and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugaith and sheep's wool, or owl feathers, and vermilion, and equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster out of it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not loosen it for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take lighter cloth, and moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind with a nutmeg, until you are sure of no heat apostema.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and let the inflammation of the member cease, and may the pain be removed, then resume the subtle binding, and add a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and bind it subtly until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that apostema has ceased to be hot and red, and pain and swelling are gone entirely, and you need poultice and bandaging, then begin again, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not remove it until after 3 days or 4 or 5.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and at no time leave it for 20 days, according to what we see, until the swelling subsides and approaches the skin's surface.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then bind it more tightly than before, and increase his flesh, as I said beforehand.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then arise hot water and temperate it, every time you loosen it, and adjust the temperature a little bit each hour;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	through this work therefore cut off the nourishment from the member, and immediately amend what foolish physicians do, who leave the member in a twisted state;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it's bad, and if it's painful work, and I don't see anything else except to ease the pain and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breakages, and diverse shapes, and the causes are assigned;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are breakages that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes away all the bone up to the notch which is below the bone, as happens in a hatchet or a fist;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and therefore this manner of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the sword cuts through bone above its surface without piercing, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and it is the wound from these two breakings great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent breaking, which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is opened in the bone is as fine as a hair, and it is a small crack, and therefore this breaking is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made by piercing with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the bone fragment enter downward, and it is so loose as when blacksmiths strike sparks on the forges.
si entre li piere dedens.	so the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist skulls, as is the skull of an infant.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and happens to all these types of breakage where small pieces are torn away as they are.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak to him in his place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of breakings by the detachment above them, and the inquiry is made through probing, and by the corrupted flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary likeness is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, numbness, fever, and the eyes issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to take out the bone before the 14th day of the moon, as soon as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to take out the bone before the seventh day, as soon as the skin below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have said come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the breaking of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and then you take the patient's head and uncover it above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the wound as soft as you can, and if bleeding comes to reveal the bone or abscess, provide the aid that is necessary, and then you fill the place with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be sure of the cessation of bleeding.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you compress at the narrow part beforehand, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another cutting even larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have various sizes of compressions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron indeed;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly so as not to bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and tough, it's necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer compressions with tapers, not too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be above the tip a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it's necessary that you have many, so that each one becomes its own place in the shape of the bone, so that you have tapers for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of three kinds of boils:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put a boil on the bone, and turn to your two [sides] until you know that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the boil somewhere else, a little bit away, and do this all around, then cut into the bone space between the protuberances, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, just as we said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you take up the force that remains in the bone to any other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more keen and more subtle than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there remains no small bones or scales, then remove them gently with the instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of working is as the Gauls say, which is more wholesome;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the load is very strong, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, whose shape is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side only, and have the parts torn in two directions, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chop all around the bone, and take good care of the skin that is below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for one removes it without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not reach to the layer, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to administer in each place the most suitable thing, according to the work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	So scrape with great rasps, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-cutting and subtle breaking, it is necessary that you bring about a cause in accordance with its direction.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is not answered to him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sores are uncovered, then you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it as lightweight as you can, so that you do not burden the sore, then administer above the other linen, and do not strain it too much except until it holds the wound alone.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be thus for one or two days, until the abscess is appeased, then remove it, and administer medicine as with roots of linden, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines from time to time without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and take care that the wound is clean from time to time, so you do not leave the ointment off or allow bowels to gather on the linen of the brain, for when bowels assemble above the cerebral cloth, they will run and burst forth, causing great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you put a biting thing on the wound, it festers above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no swelling comes from it except because of the medicine you have put on, which has that virtue, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix one cloth with it, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform the cure by methods that are necessary until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes are broken the two parts of the nail above, or one alone by itself, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that one below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert your small awl or perforator into the nail and place this break even with the tip of the index finger and at the edge by pushing forward, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and the finger cannot return to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a small rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then do it again, and hasten to restore the first part the next day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is appeased, then insert a piece of linen into the tip of the nail, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you push one apart from the other, if there is a break inside.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and be so large that they fill the pores of the nails.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some physicians say one must grease the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with the making of a mixture of chicken broth and mill powder;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the tent, as long as the bone is firm and the ligaments are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes put in or near the nail pens of goose, instead of tents, and if there is a soft draping around, and holds the breakage, and blows the patient around.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or make what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come forth, then apply a poultice by deferral, made from barley flour and incense powder, mixed with chicken broth, and then place it on light cauterizations, and do not bind the nail.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	et if the breaking of the egg is small and it is broken into little pieces so lead them to suitable instruments for that then sew up the opening and take care of things by cauterizing and binding as with suitable poultices and ointments for that
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the egg so treat it with tents and put in plugs of cloth until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	This appears to be a title or heading, rather than a translation. It would likely translate to "On the Fracture of the Jawbone" or something similar.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outwardly, and the break is only outwardly so far as to be felt by the tongue inwardly, one can hardly recognize it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the breaking is on the right side, that you put your two index fingers in the mouth of the patient.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the breaking is on the left jawbone, put your two index fingers of the right hand and put the breaking inside gently and secure it with the other hand by pushing forward and make even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jaw is dislocated in .ij., it is necessary that you administer an extension of .ij. parts, until it be equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of the teeth causes displacement or routing, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on top of the broken jawbone a poultice and put on top a doubled cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on his shoulder a great strap well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it on at the muscle that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light victuals.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the swelling changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then replace with what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply poultice on it, with powder of the mill mixed with a plenty of egg white or semolina flour, after you have removed the cerote.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on a light linen poultice, and if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, remove no part of the bone that has been taken out;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of osteum comes with suitable instruments to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on .i. suitable plasters to promote flesh, until he be healed.
de la forcele	of strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is broken many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is breakage with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is when the breakage has no wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the assistant which feels the broken shoulder.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches the neck towards the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then set the breakage evenly to your knees, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or defect.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to stretch further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded ball of cloth or wool, and it should be as thick as your necessity requires.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and lift the forceps, and hold the spear to your hand, so that you put equal the break, as it is right.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder away from the back, because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lie sovain on his habitation, and put under the shoulder .i. middle pillow, and have the ministers press down on the shoulder, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the break to your knees, and if you find fragments there, so it is necessary that you cut on.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any adjustment, then cut it at one of the chisels you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put under the forceps this instrument, to hold down the splinter.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and make it like a spoon, and is not cut off, and be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, as you see, and be one wide, and the other long, such as is the shape of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, if it is to be cut open, and the suppuration is small, or you doubt the abscess, if you use bandages and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes forth, then soak one cloth in rose oil and lard and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put powder from the mill and equal egg yolk on the bone, and put light poultices above, and place a stake under the splint, if you need one.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide band of palm width, then put the doubled cloth on top of the poultices and the emplaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a thin strip of three fingerbreadths in width and length, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band are hanging down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the steel on the bruise, and turn the bandage on the good shoulder, and below the healthy armpit, and below the sick armpit;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the bruise well, and you clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments slacken, then restrain it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit, so as to lift the shoulder up high;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	so that the bruise of the shoulder blade will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents come, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then start the poultice again, if you see that he needs it, and strain it and leave it so, until he is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and she is restored to the greatest extent in 28 days, and less at some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and one cannot feel it except by touching;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the appliance conforms to the shape of the breakage, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put powder of mill on the place with a great deal of egg-white, and gentle poultices, and cover it with a double cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a wide and subtle bandage, a little bit wider than the shoulder, and underneath the bandage are strips in some place of the shoulder, so tie that hair with linen bandages, so that the bandage is even;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it all with a great tight bandage, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and look at the tie each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time he stretches, if it is strained, and sets the thread equal if it is far from its place, and lies the patient on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder has been reset in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is complete, if he loosens, and be sure, for it is not the bone that becomes lighter quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone projects forward and points downward below the knee, then do so above and below it, making the bone that we have said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the ribs.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The weight is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in mid-air, so it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the veins in the broken bone, and it seems to be well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and takes great care to set it equal in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put on plasters and poultices above the fine salt estuary or other light wood, and envelop it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the tie back around to the back, and strain it gently, and reward each hour with an oil, and if it relapses, then restrain it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to remove, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes from the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and remove it, and scrape off the plaster, and treat what has come out with methods of cure;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the plaster, and restrain it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breakage of the ribs does not occur except in large places after the back and within the head, and do not bend except because they are slippery;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he feels well in the inquiry as one must.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set equal the break, as it is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster, and bind with a strap, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the break in the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as with a palsy, for the bone pierces the flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it leads to punctures, and all and vomits great pouring of blood, and this is from grievous health, and the old men have put great artifice.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that fill the belly to push the break backward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do so, lest hot abscesses come there, if it has not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some of them say that you should apply poultices on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	however, there is doubt whether the poultice will attract the superfluities to the place due to the weakness of condition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the site with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to put equal pressure on it, then be careful with the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear by the bone which pierces the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to guard the cavity.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, and draw it out lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound together if it is large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an abscess comes forth, one puts moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it and applies them to the area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cures the part where the abscess is located until it is healed, and makes sure to apply poultices on the outer surface where it needs to be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a crack occurs in the bone of the neck, and then it swells.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also on the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortal in many conditions, and if they are numb and feel well when they are strained and pricked, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient is healed, if one applies care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing happens on the spine of the back, and you see that he is not healed or not, then take care to see if his feet are softened, and if there is an accident in his hands, and on his back there is windiness and evacuation without his consent.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has sewn it onto his belly, there is sudden ejection without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is oppressed on his back and wishes to rest, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not toil much in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not come to him, then the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you apply heat if there is a warm abscess, and smear oil of rose or oil of hen's egg on it until it is pacified.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then put on one of the soothing and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is exposed, it is necessary to cover it with a kerchief;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and extract the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then treat with ointment applying flesh, until he is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone of the head is broken, which is called the "kowe", then put your pouch in your left hand and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the poultice and steel on top if you need.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then strain it, and if there is devoured bone, do so above, and extract the bone, and heal the wound until it is sound.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the hipbone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes the bone of the loin is broken, and if it is, then there follows a slight diminution to the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and make it two long, and decline at the parting, and come to the patient's pain in place, and pierce, and swell that which breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you stretch your hand up, as far as you are above the breakage;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and knows what kind of breakage and shape it is;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the breakage is only in the head, then set that breakage straight away, until it has its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is of great length or it declines inwardly, then cause the patient to lie on his belly until the restoration of that break is accomplished.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it straight, then apply a poultice, and then apply a linen or leather bandage, and hold the breakage in place so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and bind the limb beneath the ribs, until the joints are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscesses arise there, do not touch them, until the abscesses are appeased, and then apply what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then come back to restoration, and hold it as is necessary, if there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the break of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The aid is what is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Take one fist full of my own growing moss, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And take two threads, and weave them up high, and bind the patient on the throne;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then throw the broken arm on the fist, so that it comes to rest, and have in my hand one bundle of cloth, then weave up onto some heavy thing or have the servants spread it down below;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the mirror on the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatrail, and ties the hand to his neck, then instruct two attendants to have one hold what is above the break with their hands, and the other to hold below each string, and stretch each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the linen under the bandage, and above the bandage, and extend each of the servants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the splint is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one thread below the throne, and the other towards the side, below the splint;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the splint is towards the side, then it is necessary to put one thread lightly, without effort, so that the splint is even on the place and on the side;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the break even as it is necessary, and hold it, if abscesses do not come forth.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses do come forth, then do not hold it tight for seven days, and apply a moist compress on linen in a sitting and in rose oil, until the abscess is appeased.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it, and the manner of holding is that you put an emplaster on the break, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and wrap it in cloth, and hold onto the shoulder, and onto the arm, so that the arm is in its natural state, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not broken, then use splints, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, with two inches of space between each splint, and have each splint so large that it passes across the break three inches from each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then strain on the stars, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on binding, stronger and less straying.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, in the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the apostema is hot, then let it be until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look every three days at the swelling, lest it not increase or come to a head, or the numbness cannot reach the member because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it addresses, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then do not release it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and have their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the aid a clean linen cloth of equal thickness, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken member does not change or become loosened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If he is directed by the virtue of medicine, and gives him food that we have put before him, in such a manner that the food is to the first subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to take hold, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is common that the aid and leg should be reset in forty days from start to finish;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must untie it and administer bath and ointment medicines to direct the limb.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, so it should be unbound after 7 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus", one of which is small, and it is that which supports the socket.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is great, and it is that which lies below, towards the little toe.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance the great humerus breaks alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, restoration is light, and healing.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the great ones are broken, then healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only a small bone that is broken, then one must stretch and extend it slightly, and set it equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a great bone, one should exert oneself stronger;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it above the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little ones lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient suffers no toil.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then stretch out the ministers' arms on either side of his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the mirror equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that is loose and can be taken by the horn, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and an osteum, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the wound there is a blow, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	Take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the treatment apostems appear, so take a mixture made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the mixture gently above, until the apostems are calmed down.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the cerote, and put on the ointment of flour with a lot of egg, then place the poultices, and let the poultice of the breakage be a bit stronger and slightly larger than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six poultices or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the breakage is in one bone or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold it more above the breakage than elsewhere, and always less as you move away from there, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths be soft and moist on the burn wound, and not hard or dry.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the son (thread) be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any evil accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member with hot water, until those itchings are appeased.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the stretching, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone loosened, and similar things, so address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little bit, and let it be like that for some days, until the swelling comes, and then restrain it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or around him, then put his hands to his neck, and let his collars be even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this burn is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the mixtures and combinations of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	None! It seems you provided only a title "de la brisure de la main" (of the bruise of the hand), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in the fingers it often happens that there are bruises, and only pleasure comes many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on the stretched cloth and stretch out the broken bones, and make them even with the mirrors, until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and poultices, if there is no abscess, then apply an oil according to the quantity of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is around the parting of the plant, make a sphere of cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then wrap it in a long cloth, and apply the oil of good quality as much as the hand of the patient, and wrap it, just as is fitting.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the bruise is at the back, then it is necessary that you put an elevation above and another below on the plantar surface, so that the hand be open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if a fracture comes to any of us on the thigh, so it's the pouches, then set it even, as it should be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold with the sole, and if you see that one sets a straight little splint to lift the fracture, and does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is on another thigh, such as in the index or one of the others, then set it even, and bind with the sound thigh that is after;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or tie them all together in one holding, as much as it is worth, or set on a splint, such as the pouch;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take heed in the restoration and disposition of hot abscess, and heal those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	None! It seems you provided only a title "de la cuixe brisie" (of the bruised toe), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is often broken, and well one sees when it turns before and behind;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is such that one ties above the bridge and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister stretches their band to its equal part.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that's when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hip, so that one of the ligaments points towards the finger, and the other ligaments are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, and then have the band below the knee, and have the stretching downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then put the mirrors on the bone to its two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the band, lest abscesses do not come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, then let it cool down and then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The splint is made in this same manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap above the bridge with double-layered bandages in two or three layers, and remove any superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the crotch and the leg, below the knee downward, and let the end of the thread come up.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn back on the leg and on the groin the bandage, then put on the breastplate stars, and put one star on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then place the lead between the leg and the groin of soft cloth to put equal tension, then start to bind strongly three times or four on the breastplate;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further up on the breastplate, and loosen the tension less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two knots of thread that you have put between the leg and the groin, and bind three stars that are above, then go back down to the lower part of the thread, until you come to the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and if there is no abscess or swelling or similar thing;
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, then disconnect it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that prick, it should be smoothed over, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the way, and pull forth;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the bone is broken in such a way that one must put splints in, as in an emergency and on the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	nevertheless, in this restoration made, the patient does not recover.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the toe is restored in 1 day, or a little less or more, according to the various complexities.
de la ruelle dou genoil	None! It seems you provided only a title "de la ruelle dou genoil" (of the ankle of the knee), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the ligament of the knee there is a small break, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or a hole, and it occurs in every wound, and without a wound, and this seems quite good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one sets equal what is torn to its place, so that it can be put together and moved as possible;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and put a rounded splint in it, if necessary, and restrain it as is fitting, then reward all the preparations that we have said for other breakings, such as boils and similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he puts on each accident what is necessary to him, until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, because of which one is called "tibias" and the other is called "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it happens in just the same way as it does with an arm break, and therefore the restoration is done equally for both leg and arm, and all work is finished. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the big bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well;
et torne desoz.	and turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then administer extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nevertheless, it is necessary if the break is ugly and there are many pieces that the extension be less and more gentle;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and be according to your virtue
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that surround the leg on both sides, and be as long as the leg from the knee to below.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap the two strips around the leg above and below, and bind them together in the middle, so that the leg cannot turn to the right or left, and thus it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and some attend the splints as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and place the leg in order to prevent movement, and properly do so at the break or where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it cures as long as it remains sound.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come to breaking, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and there are two or three positions; and there is no remedy except in more or less conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping one another, so place the patient's foot on the earth, just as if it were flying, and then put your own foot now where the bones are lifted, then press down until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then place the poultice and poultices above, and put a small table under the foot of the bed with two full pillows, then bind the foot accordingly, then that you have wrapped it with bandages around and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the tie, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the toes are broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place the splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then put that table under the foot as I said, and bind it accordingly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	et if there are two or three, or more, break them, and place on each one a splint according to its size, enveloped in one drapery of linen, and hold the table under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be placed on top of the head of the table so that it is held well by the stomach of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, since we have discussed them;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bones of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of natural childbirth is broken, make the woman sit upright, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her by the rear.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the woman's natural opening with cotton, and put in as many pieces as there are stitches.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then put the woman upright, and lift her back little by little, and then let the cotton jump out until it reaches the natural entrance, and return the bone to its place with the stitches.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when it wants to urinate, so remove the cotton, and when it has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or thereabouts:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	so the break will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder and tie it to the penis with a string, and fill the whole bladder in its natural way;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the string strongly, until the bladder is emptied inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will return to the break;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton, and let it be like that for some days, until he is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hand or of the woman is broken, so restore it as we have said in the shin bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these breaks are not hidden from one who sets their study and use to them, and pays attention to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break signifies the right way to restoration in more than one disposition.
enten le donques.	Then understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the bowstring, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the bowstring;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it in cloth around, and leave it for three days or as much as possible, and it will be healed promptly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then remain it with vinegar, or if you have no other remedy, then start to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses arise, then leave the restoration just to the ninth day, until the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not prepared to equalize your hands, then remake this instrument of iron, which has seven or eight fingers in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon that he take three or four of them, according to what he may need in each treatment of breakage;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be rough and slightly large, so that it does not bend at all under the compression on the member during your work, and be hollow in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "paleinche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved joint be placed on top of the visible bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and bind it once, until it recovers, and let them be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut away the top of the bone, until the instruments have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then use a suitable instrument, such as a chisel or saw, to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what remains in the bone from sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	So do this until it is back in its place, then soak the rag in black vinegar and make sure it is well saturated.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put on the wound any ointment or other substance that has oil in it, lest you cause rot and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constrained with the breaking.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times has this been done by a foolish surgeon, and he has brought it upon the patient who is dying or being consumed.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the ligaments be softer and more gentle than other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is foul or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come to it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to put in candles.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around it, instead of candles, hard cloths and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the bowing of the wound, then remove what you have put on top all wine, and put healing balm on it, as ointment of four drugs and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the bow strings down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the bone breaks every day, and it cannot heal but keeps returning to its bow-like shape, know that there are small pieces of bone; therefore it is necessary that you gently probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these splintered pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not pull it, for many times death comes from this, but leave it until it can be reset.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance it may fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the boils that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the wound has healed, especially when it is near the joint; and it is a sad thing to see the shape of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if it is fresh to us:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if it is fresh to us then administer medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, aconite, and similar others, either one of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or with the white of an egg or with oil.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put it on the back in hot poultices, and keep it well, and do not remove it for several days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then remove it, and begin another one, until the knots are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	You strain on a piece of well-made lead;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of lead is that it absorbs all swelling above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so scrape above, and make the excess appear;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you receive it at any scraper until it is removed, and care until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and remains after weak and subtle limbs, which happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or by excessive inflammation;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for too great movements, nor indeed at his hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and cause the body to be tender, until the blood is multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer bath water, and give him joy and ease;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and wash it often with lukewarm water, until the swelling comes to the member;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken apart, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	so do not believe the foolish who say that you should break the member all over again, and many foolish men have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and many evils come, and by chance death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	nevertheless, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be poulticed with hot water or moist herbs cooked like nettle leaves, and roots, and melilotus, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the poultice is made with a mollifying plaster, like dyaquilon well made, and you take the juice of nettle, and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a poultice on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fig tree fat, and grind it with hen's hair, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there should be movement to each member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the stiffness is hardened and stubborn like stone, and it is necessary to open with a file, so it must be covered just up to the bone, at the subtle edge of the incisor lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put caution and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary to bring it back into place immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, one sets it right with sharp points at the joint;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	therefore it is not proper to move it until it has deflated.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times brings shame and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when this happens, one should make the patient well again, then leave them until the abscess is calmed down;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then apply the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations to an end at this point.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Often happens that the jawbones are displaced downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are a little pulled out of their place, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	when they are dislocated entirely and hang towards the belly, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by several gentle movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if she is whole and complete, then you must reset her quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts the mirror's pouch from one of his hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands should be free, in order to set it even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to relax his jawbones and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror adjusts it so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is stuck, all the more so if they are both jawbones together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until you gently reset them.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not neglect to bring back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with a sense of softening, then place moist cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with soft threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on his back, and their joints are between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or left, nor do they try to manipulate, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are loosened.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then moisten what they want lightly, and do not trouble themselves to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well relaxed and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be returned to their place within an hour and are not converted back to their natural state, it comes to fever and accustomed sickness, and by chance, belly upset, and by chance, vomiting pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see that, then know it is a calamity;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times has he died to whom this has happened, within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side inward along its continuity and of the chest, and is dislocated sometimes backward, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the joint firmly into your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the poultice and the bandage, and tighten it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the part that is near the shoulder cannot dislocate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the poultice and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus also the shoulder joint is brought back into place when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is dislocated in no more than three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	which one is that from which it dislocates at the lower part of the socket.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the chest.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and it dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for they leap forth suddenly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have enough flesh, it leaps forth slowly and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder blade swells up with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation is when it is below towards the socket, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them manifest diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below it, on the touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an eye.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place or move with any movement at all;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly by touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reduce when it is new or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the way is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their fists below the shoulder, and lifts the joint upwards to its place with force.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it under [the patient's arm];
si venra hastanment.	so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it doesn't come as we have said within eight days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the poultice should be applied soothing and calming, like a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on their back, and a layer of wool cloth equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be put underneath, then the nurse should place their thumb under the shoulder blade and lift it virtuously, and pull the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder comes back immediately, and if you see that you reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you make someone larger than the patient to be present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and place the right shoulder directly under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in it.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another assistant draws the patient's hand down towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then he can carry with him something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And reset it in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and there's a long poker in the earth, whose head is as hot as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed under the patient, but only if he has fallen asleep on top, and the patient is lying along the length of the wood.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then stretch out his hand downward from the other side, and the joints will return to their place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it doesn't want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take I a tallow from two arms of great and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so that it may fit to enter deeply under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place it on top of the wooden beam draped under, so that the wood does not wound the patient, then put it underneath the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And stretch my arm on top of the long wooden beam, and place the aid on top of the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one shoulder of an easel wide, and let the hands hang down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joints now relax.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, no matter what way it may be, then you should put under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere equal in size, then apply the plaster with powder of the mill, with incense and a little egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then hold it under the shoulder blade gently, and turn the lien on the plaster, and wrap the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he stays still a little while the limbs are comforted, for he will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then stay still for four or seven days, and then move him;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if he is firm and is not softened, it is sound.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in or for another reason, then you must apply cauterization to three parts, as it is written before this chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this and he loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm above, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation which is towards the breast, and shoulders, or behind, is caused by force, stretching of hands, and another kind of handling.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat him until he is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes grief and tardiness of movement in the limb, then the patient should bathe many times until that grief is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated to points and returns to points;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated in all parts, and just as much before and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, because one can see it well and feel it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocate according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with sound, you can then see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as an abscess forms, for if an abscess forms, it would be a great difficulty to reset it.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance many die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset as is, you stretch out his hand with your two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut all around, above and below, and bind the jointure to his back together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and sets the shoulder that is dislocated back to its root.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong stretching;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold it steady with two ministers, so that it does not move in extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm on each side, then having enveloped a cloth double long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the surgeon joins the joint to her hand, so anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then bends the joint firmly until it recovers;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, so applies dry plaster with some egg, and holds it firmly, and places the arm on the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, so releases the bandage and lets it be;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not hold well, so repeat the plaster and bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then loose.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if the patient feels stiffness after repositioning the joint, and it seems to move, then bathe and gently rub well, and press until the pain is alleviated.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you put a layer of fatty sheep's wool on the joint, then let it stay for a day and a night, then remove it, and cause it to enter into a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter into a bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see that, put on a moist wheat poultice warmed with butter, and strain it on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	so he will return to his normal condition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the recovery is light, more than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Toutevoie, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same time that it is dislocated, so that the flesh may be swollen or a warm abscess may come.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedy is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the middle fingers, and place the thumb equal, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the jointure, and push until it regains.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary to check if it is well in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the sick person's hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back on their hand on the table, and the physician puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, then apply soothing poultices to warm abscesses, and let it be so that it does not start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and nothing should harm the patient except as long as his hands are softened, and he cannot grasp anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to draw out by fire cauterization around the case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when his hands are back in place, then put on the ointment that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then release it and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Some times the two bones of the hand are separated on each side, some times in the back of the palm or the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then straighten the two bones and push the dislocation into your pockets until it recedes, then support the head of the bone and pull it towards the part where it is separated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then put it back in its place that day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind it with a nut, as we have said, and loosen the tie of yesterday, and make it move, and rebind it to the nut;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same thing, if it becomes dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do just as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same thing, when it becomes dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the sciatic nerve of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the sciatic nerve of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the evacuations jump beyond natural sense, nor can they be held, and many times some limb is softened, or both hips or two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shinbone bends into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which bends at the back is called "gilbositez";
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the cure is that you reward if the gilbositez has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no care or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, say the old methods of cures by great words, where there is no true benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes to the liver before, there is no understanding or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly in both sides, and one can only cure fevers by the proper one that comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face in one position and have a strap underneath him, so he does not get hurt;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a firebrand into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a band around the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers know the bonds, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two fires;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the fire as we have said, and the mirror puts its palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it doesn't recover with this treatment, then take a three-branched stick of length, and hollow out the appearance below, and the patient should be in position, and push the head of the stick into the appearance, then place the middle of the stick on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the mirror's feet on the other head of the stick, and press well, until it recovers to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, then do it to the twisting one who twists with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you put two fires on the head of the patient, one arm's length away, and towards the feet, two others, and have between each fire, a palm-breadth apart.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have a small pit in each coal, where the core runs through, and let the coals be firmly on the ground, so they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of coals let there be one coal turning, on which the core turns, and have in each turning two small coals a palm's length long, so that the core may turn;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the cord that is among the assemblers to the core towards the head, and the other cord to another core towards the feet, and each of the attendants turns his core to all the cord, and the master sets the spine equal just as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, then place upon it a drying plaster with an abundance of egg white, and then bind it, and then take the knife of three fingerbreadths in length to open up the joint and the part of the spine so that the bone may heal, then tie it with a cord just as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if no thing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the steel that we have said before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes when one administers a splint, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower back of the spine of the back, and it is thought to be dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and that's the bone which opens, so one should not have presumption there;
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	in case it would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come forth with dislocations alone, nor does it come so with other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated into four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and even more inside, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocation is that when one joins the sick leg with a healthy one, it is longer, and the sick person's knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double their knee at the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the swelling that is below an abscess, hot, because the inflammation of the crotch comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	The sign of him to whom it comes to an end is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who has it in front, is that his leg is well-shaped according to its fulfillment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the inguinal area, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there is a swelling on the hip at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you reward if the dislocation is ancient and it stays according to its condition, if there is no care.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not necessary that he has presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's of four kinds of dislocation, if you hurry to move the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	by chance it will return, and there is no need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then you must make the minister strong, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one strap that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister stretches his hand on top in the same way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft strap above the hip.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another tightens the head of the strap;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If so, then it is necessary to apply treatment to its likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, then you must take care of the patient on their chest side, then place the ligament on the root of the crotch, and the bone that is below the armpit, then stretch the ligament up towards the armpit and towards the flank.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take other attendants by their arms, and encircle the thick bone of the patient's crotch, and stretch it out strongly.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	so it will return to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligament on both heels and both knees, and let the sick leg be stretched out two doits more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then let it hang on the top of a pole, and let two long arms stretch out over the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then instruct the minister to wrap the top of the groin, and let another minister stand with the patient, wrapping the groin tightly, because the joints are returning quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the end, let the patient lie down as we have said in those with gilboesite, and stretch the bandage over the afflicted leg properly, and also on the back.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two torches, one at the head and another at the back, then insert the torch between the patient's thighs in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and let wet cloths be placed around them so the patient does not get hurt, then each minister stretches towards him, and the doctor puts an equal weight in his hand to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the bed, and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and place the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is before, it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the mirrors so that their weight is on the sick angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in back, it is not necessary to extend the sick leg downwards or lift it up to the earth, rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated in back, as we have said about the posture on both hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be above its face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be adjusted when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the hips, and apply an ointment, and tie with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and then rest for three days or four, and afterwards loosen it, and put the plaster on.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, then strain it, as before, and let it be for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then loosen it, and make him walk gently, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The jaw is dislocated according to three manners:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inward and outward, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not bend to his hip, know that he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his knee to your palms, and bring it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another attendant stretches out his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has eased his leg slightly at the hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put plaster on top, and make the leg settle at the hip, and keep it together firmly for three or four days, then loosen.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not trouble the patient to get up, until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, then extend it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of gout, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes strained, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tense ahead of the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the return is gentle, and one must stretch it gently with his hands when he is merely stretched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated entirely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and one attendant hold him forth except by the leg, above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand two times, then stretch it up, and put the foot beautifully up.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then start the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return like this, then make the patient sit on the ground on his back, and place one pillow firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloth around, so that the patient is not harmed;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then take hold of the thigh by the attendants, and another attendant stretches the foot to their hands or to a cord that they tie around the calf of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch each attendant equally, and the cord should be placed between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when one stretches;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the mirrors equal to the dislocation in their hands, and other attendants take hold of the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is fixed, then place the plaster and bandages on top, and form straps, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch out for those nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligament is not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it two days or three, and if the ligament loosens, then loosen the straps;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then release it on the third day or the fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term is reached, it's not a guarantee that it won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come to this, then it is necessary that you ease them, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
des dois	knees
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the knees are dislocated, then they should be well stretched without labor, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the heel or foot, then it's necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a one-piece table straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is equal, and nothing appears, then place a two-legged stool under the heel of the foot, then strain together, and leave it for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation and one tries to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not humble in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and slow, nor hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use soothing things on the abscess first, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscess may live and not become worse;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is at rest, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and cure the wound as it needs, with anointed dried substances;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a break with the dislocation, and small bones disconnected, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and take care not to enter into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth moving according to your Creator, and by the knowledge of your armor and body.
