O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everywhere, thus the science has perished and decayed, and there remains nothing more of the foundations except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have changed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is set aside.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should bring it to life together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together with the forms of remedies for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands were found in our time, is the art of medicine elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and of the moving and resting veins, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the noun is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest they fall into error and kill men; thus I have wanted many times more than those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I see a foolish doctor who cuts into the abscess of the scrophula or neck of a woman, and cuts into the arteries of the neck; for which so much blood issues out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; if he removed it with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have seen that it was called for by the doctor, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they had removed it he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage there was a wound; and the doctor, ignorant of his craft, held the breakage on the wound as if by strong ligature, and did not leave it to heal properly, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be touched; and afterwards it became so that the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release his leg; and when I saw it dislocated thus it was in a bad state and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was almost lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wound that had swollen to an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not matter if one touches it with iron, unless it is in a place where one can thoroughly clean out what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: it is to know whether there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you be on guard, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in consideration, and take hold of your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and let go of the diseases that bring grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish mirror."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the iron materials of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and the harm are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and from this speak the wisest men, and agree with them; and I suffer little from their words, for I reduce their length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery aids universally every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know hot complexions without matter, and dry complexions without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions with matter, some said that fire cautery is of great aid; and others disagreed, saying that fire cautery is not effective for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Here is the translation:
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures and has greater goodness than medical burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come except to the member which is cooked, and does not harm another member if not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines pass from one member to another in alleviating, and bring relief to the suffering member by healing the wound; and sometimes the patient is cured by chance.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should reveal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or you receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree at the time when the cauteries are to be made, and they select carefully.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the sudden injuries are often set right by the aid of cautery; and similarly, the cauteries are for necessary pains and hasten rather than wait for a longer time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think of it, dear son, as the foolish doctor; for in the disease that is healthy through cautery there is no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine which changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more than medicine by the haste of its value, and for the virtue of his work and sign.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease becomes worse at times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the excesses by the acquisition of food and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in a place where there is little excess and moisture, as cauteries dense for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered many ways of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of the foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that cauterizing instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they didn't say this because of the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make purification, but it's not true, for I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauterizing instruments of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they thus said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has almost cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they make a fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauterizing instruments that we have made suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter of the main joints just below, because it will be easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	For the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there are two things that one does by reason of a disease called "soda", and by reason of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of multitude of dreams and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solutive medicine modifying the head, either 2 or 3 times, according to what the strength and age and custom of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient clear.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and let the two moles come, if it bleeds from the gums, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is its form.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cautery on the affected place, signifying with ink, and make it descend and extend your hand slowly and steadily while turning; then lift your hand suddenly, and re-examine the place if you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread and wrap it in soft cotton inside, and put it on the affected place, and let it stay for three days; afterwards put a moist compress on top; and let it stay until the wound is clean; afterwards cure the wound of the injury called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And thus said the old ones, that when you leave a wound open for too long, it purges more; and therefore it is of no help to you.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the opening is burned, and then reset on what is burned of the opening, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should leave the cautery so long on top, and press so hard that it draws out of the opening as widely as the veil that women put in their hair, because the humors issue forth badly; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and it seems to me that the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and mending for me, and that is why I use it sometimes in assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, one should use the remedies of iris and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and applying plaster; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it not be too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little that we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Here is the translation:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and other cures are done that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then you do cauteries according to eight ways, that is to know medicine against the ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine against the ague are that you take a dozen of ashes, and remove the bark and recook it; then make the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can replace the dozen of ashes under the skin; and when it will be replaced, bind it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then unbind it and apply fuers to the dozen of ash, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a cotton plug in burre so that it can suppurate.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of anointing, until it is healthy; and if you see that it does not work with any of the combustive medicines that I have written or in the twelve treatises on combustive medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the material which is its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the thickness of the skin be burnt; and lift your hand so the artery does not become hard, which is defective, and decorates abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards put cotton in the wound of the vein, and put it on the place for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the place of the ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and beware not to touch the artery in this emigration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice against the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound at the top of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on extracting an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. burnings; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears caused by cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you elevate a little above the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the wound; and it has .x. points around each ear; after curing the wound until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply fire cautery to similar things that come from dryness and numbness of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flux and evacuations of the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with .iii. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the .iii. lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery at the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cuts be a little larger; after curing the vein as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then make three fire cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last fire cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so be cured thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, you must give the patient large pills and mondified cyril, clarifying the brain; afterwards, reset the whole head of the patient, and place on the occiput an emplaster of sinapi written or treated in the book of emplasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, good is; and if it is not, make three fire cauteries in the head descending to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure as the others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the mastery is, another on the three horns, and cure until it is good; and be the cauteries called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have said before; afterwards raise the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and behind and above the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is gone, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healthy, and make the cautery which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	from epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clean the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew mundifying foods to clear their brain often with good meats; afterwards they recover the head in the middle, and make a cautery as we have said before, and make a cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo cauteries as I said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and thus make olive oil cauteries in the manner that I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excess or corrupted and gross humors, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the declining excess that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clear their brain according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you apply the fire cautery, make points all over the cautery. This method of cautery softens the brain equally; and then put cotton wool in the burrow and in grease of a hen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the sweat of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the sweat comes first to the eyes through the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing clarifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to clear his head, and make him cautery in the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descents of the sweat are in the .ij. eyes together, or in one, if the descents are in one; and cover all the cauteries all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the length of the temple; and beware of the corruption of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of cloth as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of cautery how you will establish it; and no one has ever made cautery or operated beneath the two last ribs.
dou cors des larmes	because of the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear in the shape of the chief defect; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold rheumatic fluids, then I do the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the aforementioned chapter: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or operating beneath the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, if one cauterizes above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	because of the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit him, then give a drink to the sick man .iij. nine cochies; after he raises his head, and make him undergo cautery or a thousand golden cauteries; and make .ij. cauteries of the cautery which is called «clavilis» on the .ij. sorcis, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called «olivare». for it is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that they make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. sorcis as long as the eyelashes are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as much like the flower of myrtle as possible, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk-like perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery in the form of this:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have marked little by little several times, so that the heart is relaxed at that spot; and the signs of health in the vein are that you see the skin retracted, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then I put moist cotton on a poultice until the inflammation is reduced; after treating with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same spot, as you did previously; and if the hairs are deficient, so cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicated cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow so they are large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and lively chalk, of each one ounce, and mix them well together; and do it hastily, so it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then one must operate on one, and if both alike; and put beneath the eye moist cotton in a poultice; and the head of the patient should be healthy and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press little by little all the times that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it feels biting also like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have made the cautery long enough, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the mordication has passed, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted as if it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the lever or the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are at a point; then put cotton moistened in a burst so that the bitter heart is calm, after curing the lever of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And it is necessary that you take great care to guard your work well with a strong guard so that the medicine does not reach your eyes. And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the lever which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foliage of the dead mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, make your constraints; and do not deviate from the right way for him who is the student of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position; and hold the joints of his head with your hands in such a way that they do not move, nor does he nod his head; afterwards apply cotton soaked in oil or juice of persley on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: and it is applied to the head as if forming the shape of a curved pen, just like the cautery; if you see, if one part is pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but in any case, this which is applied is of no use for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is overturned, and pulling out the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, then operate, and pull out the bowels; afterwards place on the cautery hot in form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail beneath the eye, so that your hands do not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	Here is the translation:
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then make a fistula, and cut into the wound; afterwards put in the incision a subtle camel-hair brush because it is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient's limb at all, so that the melted lead does not run to its oil; and it is necessary to put on the oil a cotton wad soaked in water or in wine: the lead is thus poured into the wound of the fistula, and the healthy part is marvelously sanctified.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertuses to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is suitable for its own limb.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur in lips that are called "hairs", and similarly in lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks from what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat it with a small cautery iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply it quickly to those cracks until it reaches just to the source; after treating the skin of the scab, until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the jaw or in the eye socket, or in the roots of teeth, after it has made putridity and rot and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand so long as the iron rod comes to the fontanelle of the head, and put it behind the head; and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not avail, then put the head of the patient in your healthy hand; after heating the cautery in such a way that you place a chain over the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastanment, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold for an hour and rub forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the gums softened restrained, and the moist humors dry up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and medical treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cautery with a mixture and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with a mixture is such that you take a mixture of ashes, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and envelop it at the point of a tent, and boil it in a mixture bubble, and put it on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it cools; and thus do often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the mixture and cotton are cold, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron hot enough that the fever reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Here is the translation:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do fire cautery where you want to, and according to what you are able to do; and that is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	of ulcers
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When ulcers are of flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery from which afterwards comes the form, and has two openings for the fumes to issue out at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is, as long as it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply cotton wool soaked in balm so that the discharge is removed; afterwards cure the wounds with ointments and tents as long as they are healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moistures prevail on the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated first by solutive medicines; afterwards do fire cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little. Afterwards do another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and this is the cautery called "clavile" from which we have the form beforehand; and cure the wounds as we have said before so that they are healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the forearm are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever nor swooning, and it is an ancient disease, then they make two cauteries on the strength in their veins; and another cauterization between two marmots; and so the cauterization which is called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking the whole cauterization which is called "poins" because the form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and so the poins are just up to ..., or elsewhere within. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and so the cauteries are at three veins according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are the lighter cauteries, because you make three of them in a cup.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, the patient feels it in his back and on his side; afterwards, he raises the heart which is within the tender part with two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves because it is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it penetrates just to the side, and there would be the figure of the cautery with .iiij. cauteries; and because it is done with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, therefore the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon, and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often it is applied to this nerve because there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the fire cautery on the affected areas with wax; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, that thing happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clave caultery, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is reinforced, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Here is the translation:
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Here is the translation:
de la mice	of the disease
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the backbone which we have said in divisions of treatments, and it does not profit, then they resort to three manners of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of the manners is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the backbone, according to the figure of the cautery of the fire which we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be aware on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has three knots, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the cord that is on the backbone, or where the pain of the disease comes from the left side, and let the elevation be according to the cord, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Here is the translation:
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in a place near the ribs; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cautery be opened for a short time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will come together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been described here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauterizing iron without turning. And do not enter too deeply into the foot, lest the yellowish fluid should be stirred up, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on both legs, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be of a length, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without moving, so that the fluid is dissolved; after curing with other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before or cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel with every subtle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each rib, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and of gross cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all deflected downwards from the almond-shaped point and a little in triangles, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflating, then one makes a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clavile cauteries; and let the cautery burn for a long time. After healing, leave the limb so it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you touch the fleshiness named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems to be rash, and then set it all ablaze on the coped "thelul"; and let your hand go as far as the cauteries come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, then cauterize each one as we have said; after healing the profitable joints so they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the skin, it will be of greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer manipulation or operation, which we will discuss in its place, a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and gives putrid and corrupt matter, so you must prove all the subtlety of the tent, and take care to know how deep it has gone. Then heat the cauterization that seems appropriate, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cauterization until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to the need of the body; and be careful not to harm the nearby nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, beware of these places, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not a permanent injury; after curing the flesh so it is healthy, and if the wounds are well-scraped, and the matters are removed at length, then know that the flesh is entirely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, know that the flesh is troubled, and corrupts the bone in its foundation; and thus one of these things we will discuss in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the loin comes from cold and great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to the loins on one side and the other to the clavicle, as we have previously mentioned; and if we make a thousand cauterizations in a row, they will be more effective.
de la vessie	of the vessel
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the vessel is tender and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a fire cautery on the affected part above the vessel, where the hairs of the finger begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our thumb; and you make a cautery above the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be made according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, then you feel great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said or like a cautery of the vessel, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be made according to the form mentioned before.
de la hainche	of the handle
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the handle of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of departure are twisted, so you must cautery the patient on the handle of the hip at the circle, and mark before the joint surrounding the handle as it turns, so that the handle is within the circle; and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present for you, make three cauteries of the large olives, and let the cauteries be as deeply set as all the veins; and treat until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hollow of the thigh, and it's from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we said in the division and the cure is worthless, and the disease is ancient: then it's necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the method of fire cautery is according to eleven methods: it's to know that it assembles burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such: that you apply cautery on the hollow of the thigh in three triangular shapes, and make a good profundity and greatness, and leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; no one makes cautery in the middle on the top of the thigh, because there is eleven according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if you apply cautery to the cautery of the circle that we mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the method that one uses in sciatica, when pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make three cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle two fingers, a little to the left side; and let the cauteries be cutellaire, and let the skin be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or near the ankle, make three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, do it more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do fire cautery on the cuticular or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave a single one so much that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great annoyance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the hollow of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted to the point that the feet were. After a burst of belly which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parties together, do cautery on one and on the other, in this manner. // And the wise men said in the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this way, make a fire so sharp and so thick as a navillon of a date, or a little less, and be between the interstices and be from one interstice to another spacing the quantity of a thumb's breadth; and let the interstices be above two parts, and let them also be like nails, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated so that it becomes completely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the box of the thigh of the patient, and turn it around the healthy side; and cautery once with a round cautery rod and leave it for three days; and then make an emplaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until he is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Here is the translation:
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar matters of cold expanded material, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after that the patient is void of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line 5 cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 cauterizations or 4 at the cauterizing claw in the middle, according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a withered arm when they lift it, and fear; and you find in the upper spine of the back and in our appearance which comes onto the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize with a cautery of that kind according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the cautery should burn each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize around the spine with a poignant cautery, draw .ij. lines, and let the points be near one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in weakness which is in the region of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which the doctor properly calls "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to prick on the face of the foot, then have a complete cautery made at each point that is claimed. And if the pains come right up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then have a cautery made on each knee, two or three cauteries for each part, with all the complete cautery olive; and if you have mastery of more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary, as long as the espé of the heart is at rest.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend right up to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains some pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come right up to the sides or right up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge fleum, then he will be healthy with the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the swelling falls to the hips and it's new, if it happens that when you want to cure, he does not eat during the day; and he uses things that ease the stomach, so the farts come out of his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the swelling is repaired, and you massage with your fingers, and anoint beneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and all signs are similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is white and he casts out sensations. Then massage the swellings to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so they do not turn back; and work well on the hips of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a sheet on the hips, and another on the pis who holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence yet another until you come just to the bone; and beware subtly that the swelling does not burst when you do the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this the patient may not die, or other evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worth nothing. And it happens that the cauteries of children should be subtle according to the measure of their age, and of great people also according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cautery of butter so that the inflammation is lifted; after cure other ointments so that he is healthy, and cast the patient twenty days on his back so that the wound is well sucked; and it happens that his nourishments should be relaxed for a long time, so that the swelling does not burst when he prepares to go into chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made splint, and for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and too high pride; and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe the treatment of surgery in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are conjoined, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make them a .j. cautery of the cautery wound according to its quantity, and let it be burned by the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at .iij. angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first sign the place of the incision and make a line for the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized area with a gentle touch. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from chronic pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in no member, either from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, that's good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it should be moved to the member that is next to it, because it must be that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of messiness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The messes are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire patient, then you do five cauteries on the chief: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and leave it so long as the cauteries come just to the bone, and so that the scabs issue forth if the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the sickness is scattered throughout; it pertains manifestly, so it is necessary that you apply cauterization to these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and one cautery on each nipple, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the chest and another delicate one, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calcifying, so you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and is profitable; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from cauterization as the healthy ones feel it, because the body is already almost corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the iron tools. After curing with flour poultice mixed with honey and other treatments until they are healthy.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Here is the translation:
de albaras	of the cauteries
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of veal and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix all together, and tie with a bandage, and apply to the skin until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer begins to develop, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle around the tumor. And some wise men say that one should make a cautery at the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and the more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with a cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the excessive flow it makes or because of the old age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too weak) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see hasten to heal: then cauterize extensively with many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten healing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that the cautery is penetrating everywhere, heat the cautery to the point where its form is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" so that the cauteries penetrate the heart, and let them be such that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated. Afterwards, cure until it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease which is called "corrodens" and it's nothing other than a gangrene of a limb, because it eats away the members like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery along with fire, then heat the small and large cauteries according to what is needed for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you burn out all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it two days, and apply cauteries suffering burning with oil until the burns from fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the treatment of wounds producing flesh.  And if you see after two days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this gangrene has often been cured by medicine along with fire cautery in place of fire cautery; but always fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of ulcers that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a large swollen thing that ulcerates the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It's known as fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat one cautery like a pen of velvet, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can penetrate all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after putting everything hot on the ulcer, and turning your hand entirely around the ulcer as much as it comes to the font of the ulcer; and leave it thus for two days until it begins to putrefy; then make a plaster of mild sage boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the ulcers will be cleared and separated from their roots. Then treat the wound with ointment, making it healthy flesh.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by deficient humors of the body, and often occur in many places and on the feet, it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery; and this is how: take a cane of iron or a pointed awl, or a knife of boxwood, and place it on the nail and the joint, which is to say piercing the veins; and place the cane so that it surrounds everything entirely, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then find the warm water pathway deep into the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its roots. Thus do one after another until you have pulled out all those that are in the body, then cure the ulcers that cause heat.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olivaire cautery; if you leave the trembling, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of small boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	At no time appear by default the corrupt bodies, or small boils, that come from gross corrupted matters. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one do cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of wood of myrtle, of which the point is taken in fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lenticular cautery. And at no time are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot increase in advance, but are disencumbered of the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great removals of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from corrupt bodies, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever it happens to nobody, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold strongly as long as the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue more; then put fire cautery, olive oil or more small and large as they are all red; then take .i., big or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery strongly until the blood is restored.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens to flee when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the blood flows out of the artery, it cannot be well restored unless it is by one of the three ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to restore blood; and so it is tied and held in place immediately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers restoration of the constricted blood by applying tight bandages or putting things in, or similar things, does not profit from it at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to none and he does not have better medicine present, then he must put his finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it is restored above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but let the frost of cold water often be very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and restored; and make an inquiry beforehand about what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter all about the disease where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or medicine burning, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter among the main chief just below, and I will go in this chapter by the same method for it is true that one finds more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who aggravate their illness so that they die easily from the worsening of their disease, and from the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are those who give their opinion, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is deceptive. It does not become that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but rather put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and may you be willing to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	a full head of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is known that this illness often affects children at birth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a misplaced response that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and nearly all those whom I have seen hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in the hands of some healers.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not be supported; and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatula-like instrument:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make three incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the swollen areas of each part, and the water flows out when you press with your hand inside, and it does not return: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside. Afterward, hold the incisions with drapauls and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then disengage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be comfortable, and give the patient dry food without much moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the abscess opens, and assemble the water flow; for it never goes forward; never backward; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Here is the translation:
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens that a disease called "catarre" occurs in the eyes or in the foot, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not profit at all, then the last resort cure is cautery with which one should cauterize the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, then, when you cauterize the veins, that the patient make his head back; after scrubbing the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extracting the patient's neck to the entire .i. cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the eyes of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly reposed; then mark the eyes of the notch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument of .ij. inches, so that the vein vein reaches just to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, place the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize below, cutting as if .ij. fingers are traversing.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then the blood flows out continuously above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then mark from the notch and make a cut just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flowing so it is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the siphac, then cut that apostemes burst not in vain, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of hemorrhage
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old hemorrhage comes, and there is catarrh, due to the moisture of the eyes and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medical cures and all this does not profit him, if we cauterize the arteries of the temples and the burning heat, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly restored except in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then the patient removes his neck from certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spatula in the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then scrapes the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then raises it high as pincers, and separates well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turns to the point of the unguin, then covers according to the quantity of the .ij. heads. For if it is not covered, then does not know the without doubt all in all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draws out blood from the .vj. veins, just to .iij.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you bind it in .ij. loops of a strong double thread of silk, which will not be visible before the closing of the wound, and will stop the flowing of blood; then covers the superfluity which is between the .ij. ligatures at that same hour, and then, if you see, then cauterize with a cutaneous cautery just to the bone as much as the heads are covered; and it is the mother work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is aid to finish the swellings: for this it is of great aid against the swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the empty space with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when you remove them, then be cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as you were opening, then hasten to cover with cautery, or fill the empty space with vitriol and hold with your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this present, then place on the empty space your finger until the blood is congealed, and raise the empty space of cold water until it stops, and be steady as it is necessary; and what is more mild and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cautery the vein with this trenchant .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to wait longer for their healing.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, then they hold less of the blood.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the .ij. knives .i. a large space, and then when you have signed to incise the .ij. veins, and you place the burning iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and covers the vein in .ij. veins; and should be separated between the .ij. parts because it is not surrounded by this cautery from all sides; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are on the outer surface of the head due to fever, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming inflamed, and feels as if walking in a fog; and since they are thin and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, thus it needs a cure for this.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And the old ones called it "confused cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three digits deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three digits as three ribs above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are as three ribs above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joint.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you will prepare a piece of sponge and much of fabric to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula bent at three parts from where it is in the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Of the incision that is to be made at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two sutures to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first suture the instrument called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mean suture. And cut all the vessels that come down from the head to the eyes as much as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another part in the mean suture up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press on the skin for the taken blood; then put in each suture a piece of old cotton, and put on soft cloths soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that abscesses do not come; and on the third day remove the dressing, and apply a great quantity of hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a person has a familiar catarrh, and you see the eyes are dim and small, and the vision is foggy, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and where the head aches in the front with a bitter pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these signs that those matters and that catharsis do not come from many veins, and the cure is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one equally large. And start from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and hold your hand away from the edges of the temples that move to the grindstone; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put in a lot of cotton, and stretch tautly with linen thread; then lay on top a warm drapery soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to form hot; when it is healed, you must rub the bone as long as the flesh begins to grow, then apply treatment of things that excite growth, which make the flesh grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to stimulate growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of these three things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, if they are yellowish, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a little violet oil or oil of sisament, then you will make extraction; and when you do this, and the nostrils are stopped up when you do this, and you put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and it is above the ear. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, then you will make extraction with subtle pincers, in which case this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then you will make extraction with a subtle little double-edged hook; and if it does not come out through this, then make a cane of iron and put the head of the cane or opening of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the cane with wax so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out in the form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from what takes the ossicles, and put some instrument that is at a point to do this, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not know how to do all these things that we have said, hurry to open the ear thus that an abscess falls out with spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape it out with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and continue treatment until they are healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Here is the translation:
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a thorn and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then one should assist in the extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and treat distillations, but the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms appear, take out the pincers subtly, and if they do not appear, take the candle of the form where it is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is constricted below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly all the way to the candle; do this as often as all the worms are seen. And if they do not come out, stop up with a cotton swab as I have said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, assist in distillations that the ancients have experienced in the removal of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this entire instrument, it is the form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper constricted below at a small opening, and above they are covered for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the scraper and envelop it in cotton thread; then throw your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand strongly so that the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and it is the distillations that are a little warmed by fire, as one distills in the ear; and take care not to make it too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a small hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or when a piece of flesh grows inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from the front into the ear, if one cannot see them well; and sometimes it happens that the small hole is closed, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from the front, if one cannot see it well, is of great importance for the health in many dispositions, and in this case you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatiumile of what is its form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be agitated and cleaned thoroughly in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opilation is from flesh grown or a cord of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until all the flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operations are performed in the ear, take a subtle razor and shave lightly with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain in the ear, perceive it lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the healing.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the flow of blood comes, one should plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the flesh of wounds
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	It is the ulcer that grows in wounds of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cover with a spatula of its roots; then put on the eye a glassy balsam.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not decay, one should cauterize the subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauteryizer afterwards incises and masters; and many times repairs, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not regrow.
de la gresle	of the scab
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things that seem like scabs in their shape and hardness come from papers of the eyes, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of great moisture in the paper above and below; the treatments are such: take a wart and let the grandine move from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make a large opening, then gently scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the crack is great, assemble at a costure, and treat until it be healthy; and if it's small, do not make any force, for the ointments restore quickly and enchant.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends from the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, do not harm; and when the grandine is covered, lift the oily saliva, and cure the affected area of what enchants quickly so that the patient may be healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the surgery is that the patient puts his head in a healthy state; and then takes a drapery of linen, and arranges a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the extremity of each part, then places it on him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other, so that the extremity is assembled within the circle; then makes a moderate incision in the spatula-like trench, not making it larger than the wound made at the vein's opening; and makes the skin fold over so you reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity emerges from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Draw out then at once a piece of drapery between your two hands at the deformed place, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread; and be careful not to push in the incision, that you do not reach all the way to the spatula-like trench just up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision so that it appears; then draw out as we have said, then moisten drapery in oil and water, and place it on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break their seal and put on a corrupting moisture that is delayed. Then the treatment should be such that it becomes healthy. And if they come to a hot abscess, then the treatment of poultices soothing until it becomes healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs unevenly other than naturally, and are wrapped up, then they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so much that it is caused by the destruction of the eyes; and there is a treatment in three ways: either by cautery with assembled fire, or by medicine agreeably according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then push a needle through all the threads; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw all the threads above the paper, and turn them to the rasp; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the uneven hairs, all the spatula copant, from the great tearer just up to the small one; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small layer of cotton and of drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if a part is treated where you remove a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper is softened; then apply the whole spatula to the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great ladder up to a small one; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the .ij. angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the .ij. leaves to a single thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluous threads on the .ij. curls all sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, if there is no cure, then leave the thread and the hairs for 3 days or 2 days; then treat the wound without a thread of dry and constricting things, because the paper relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the thread is useless (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, to 3 ounces of oil separated according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then remove that which overflows from the small equal forces according to the form which is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not even, take a needle or have a thread. And insert it into the figure; and put another thread beneath the large artery, and the second thread beneath the small one, and assemble the threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and it sometimes happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and on the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it deeper according to what I have said, and then make artificial caines by art, and subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the parchment of the eye, and extract the artificial caines from the formed parties; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin that will be restrained will become morbid and necrotic and putrid, until it falls apart by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow, if the scalp has weakened forces, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine silk thread subtly; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the hunt .i. another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the head of two threads; then put the patient's head in your healthy state; and let it be under the sun so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and minor work, then put the needle in the entire hunt at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce into the paper hastily as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there are .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come forth at the entire hunt on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had arranged, so that the hunt comes forth from the pertus above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, then accompany .i. long hair of natural whiskers, and let it be elevated with that which you leave, so that it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the purification of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called «aleacrati» or the purification of the eye occurs, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment is that you open up the sutures, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or alum solution soothes, and an ointment made from the juice of a certain plant, wrapped in a bandage, and cure it thusly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care to guard against it not swelling according to its original form; and these treatments that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of operating on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and you stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce through the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread appears at the top of the flesh; then you put the flesh above the entire needle, and cover it with a large spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what it needs, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the papyrus, and make two cuts or sutures within the papyrus; and so are the heads of the two cuts at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make them form an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has no "griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tinctures, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cuts or sutures or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to be skilled in every way so that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the same patients, according to what they need from operations and treatments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	due to the inflammation of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this inflammation has occurred in a manner that the paper above is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to apply the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, lest the patient suffer from the spatula being too pointed or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, gently scraping off the assembled area, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and it is entirely healthy, and never again becomes oily or salty, and raises a gentle and cool dew, and of a clear color; then place between the paper and oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a soft and abundant ointment; and after three days use a gentle and soothing treatment with similar things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner of the eye is in two manners: it is nervous and similar to a hard, dry crust, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white, moist congealed moisture, which when touched with iron and pricked with pincers, cannot be moved; and one and the other appearance encroaches towards the great eyebrow, and grows little by little until it covers all sight and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the finger as pincers of small double curvature, and hold it above; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or a cow hair, or an ox hair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pierce with the entire needle, and tie the finger with a thread and hold it above, and strip all the hair on the side of the finger that joins the thumb and the index finger just to the head, then cut the remaining part into the root of the arm and all the subtle and small forces, and leave the natural skin or arm, so that by incision it does not affect the body's accustomed habit; and never hold the finger at only one joint, but at the thread, as we have said; then strip on all the subtle parts according to what is its form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the subtle parts do not touch the raw skin and break it, and that the thumb is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little of warm broth into the oil, and make a plaster from litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured as much as possible so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the finger is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, many times this type of finger is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have related in the division, and if you see its cover, then open the oil of the patient, and take the subtle part lightly a little gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the finger subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not at all and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium made of litargire and red collyrium and sew broiet, and stop up to the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, then as an abscess breaks, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh is sweet in the eye at night due to great annoyance, then suspend it from the onion, and take a part of it and not all, lest tears come; then distill into the red collyrium made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyebrow
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Here is the translation:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, if you apply the oil of broiet or distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton on the wound with a bit of egg white, so that it may be assured against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the blood does not mount, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things that calm hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make many wounds heal in the eye by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you elevate the treatment of each weak oil according to natural ways; and accidental ways, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	from the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its work and weaken the eye for three years. It is therefore necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which it is, is false, and there is no other illness beyond the vein; then coil in such a manner: command the patient to put his head in your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and be subtle double veins according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be a ninth caution by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then coil the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those vain efforts from the eye; and beware that you do not blotch the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with more than those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the collier eye green and red to corrupt what is morbidly swollen.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot coil all that in this hour, make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is eased and assuredly cured of hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is before, so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if there is an engine in it that you make on the abscess, where it must be opened, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made into a chief iron .i. chief returning, and should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicines having excitant properties.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the joints are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not become worse nor abscessed, and bad accidents do not come, know that it is healthy; if not, then there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines sharp, and when it is uncovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the iron be angled at .iij. angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just up to the chief as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the patient's arm where the ligament is, and withdraw your hand from the eye, a little, then turn to the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which the veins come into being if they hold their hand on their knee; and then restore the arm with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh becomes numb and endures the limbs, thus the material goes to the knee; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open fully everywhere, and it does not disturb the nose, nor diminishes, thus you must bind the patient; then apply the poultice, then place warm cups or hot irons to suck out the humor, then put on the eye a mixture of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply it with bands and drapings; and the manner of the drapings is that you take drapings quite soft, and double each one in three, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then strain it with a hard bandage in the shape of a circle, and recommence the cups to suck out the humor without piercing; then remove the cups and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the bindings become loose, thus you must rebind strongly; then remove the binding after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, then recommence the application and the drapings and the binding and the cups until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of a veiled cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the woven fabric, then open, and comes forth from papers as if it's a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then you see the cover, the works are such that you put a needle in the root of the part below, just up to the one above, then put another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to disposition; then cover the whole with double thread and tie around the woven fabric, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put it on the same moist spot in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads dry with the fabric, then cure the eye of comforting things until the wound is healthy; and many times the wound is restrained by the fabric each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes make a great appearance, if they pierce at the subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and corrects the moist albugineous and descends into the eyes, and enters inside immediately; then hold it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the hollow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	from the eyes of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have already seen the similarities of the eyes in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; if one works according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye steady and very firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a hair at the whiteness of the eye at the part of the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the opening in this paper by the clarity of the woven fabric, and then place the instrument next to where the eye is, then press it beneath one way after another. If the eye descends now, if you see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After rest, and if the eye rises again by a second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly while turning your hand little by little; and then put back in the eye a little of that gem, and remove from there the eye within. Then place above the eyes estoupe or lain moillie in oil rosset and abundant water, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with abundant water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the patient cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not go too far in, but make it subtle, then apply the cautery, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient .i. the dormitory approaching, where he sleeps on his back in .j. the darkened room; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be arranged according to his disposition until the third day; then disengage him from that same darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, because the water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If abscesses burst forth, you disengage the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, disengage the vision and put on his face .i. a little ring to cover for some days, and be again in that darkened house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they made alum salt by piercing, where they sucked up the water, but never did I see any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of algmada, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly aligned:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And thus the head of this subtle bone is in three angles aqueous.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No time is born or nose flesh joined diversely, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if it has flesh of fox color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In those cases of these fleshes which is soft and not engrafted, you should place the patient between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the onion to those fleshes, and they will flee; then hold that you can sustain with a subtle spatula on one side, until you know that this flesh is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, open everything, i.e. the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if you do not surpass it, or abscess breaks, if you cut as it is necessary; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then pour out either oil or water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the abscess does not open, and moisture comes up to the palace, it means that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pass as it should, it means that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, although the instruments do not come for cutting: then you must take a thick thread of linen, and be careful with our hands, and have an interval of about an inch or less; and put the patient's head on the thread at their nostril, and pull it out through the mouth; and often children are taught this way, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart as we do with a thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corroded all the remaining flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian unguent, and put it back in the nostril as before; do this for two or three days, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a small tube in the nostril for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterward, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill the oils and medicines into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, do make a close tube, and let the instruments be plain for expurgating the head; and have a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease appears on the head above the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large soon, so that it is visible to behold; and therefore you should apply a poultice at the beginning, and remove all hair, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay applying it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of fiery color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, because when you apply it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fiery color, and you see that you can fully apply, then look at the patient and apply sense without fear, and cure the dry and withering things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is covered and bandaged
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be aware that when continuous solutions come in one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, for there are some homes. Therefore, it is necessary to consider what happens to none, if you look at the wound whether it is fresh and full of its blood; and then join the .ij. veins to a joint, then cure until it is healthy; and if the veins are separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you clean all parts of their circumference until they heal, then join the .ij. veins to a joint, and bind, and sprinkle with powder made from dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have had abscesses on their lips for a long time, similar to grains of vegetables, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and divide into each notch, and take them as pincers and cover each part; then apply the liquid after the incision of vitriol broiet, so that the wound may be stained; and then apply the oil of hazel, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it happens on the gums where it is joined, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary to hold them in place with bandages, and cover at their root, and let the swelling or blood flow; then apply vitriol broiet, or other drying and astringent powders; and if that one returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return again after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatments for coping.
des sordens	of ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are rough and bitter; and sometimes the black and citrus-colored teeth decay, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their head be steady, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus you do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have mastery of various forms of treatments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that are removed from the teeth have other forms than those that are between the teeth; and these forms and others are prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay doing it as much as you can, because one should not do it hastily; for it is a very delicate substance just up to then, and there is no excuse for doing it roughly.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Here is the translation:
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Here is the translation:
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you should do well to warn that you not break, and in remaining a part, and return to the patient through the malice of the root for greater pains than the first. And you warn that you not do as the ignorant healer does, who by their haste and hardness often breaks the cartilage, and not amends what we have counted; but they come often by the obstruction of this great illness through the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the wound with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, if you apply the vitriol ointment; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which one must change first, should be long pointed and thick handles, so they do not slip when you extract the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of thick members so they do not bend when extracting, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should have teeth for holding in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you put on the cotton cloth moistened with burr. One day or two, until the gums are softened, then apply the tongs called "algefri", so the head seems to be a beak of a sieve; and thus they are made as if like a file and that is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say a pelican, so that is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, it is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, so that the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument which has three claws, because it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are before in the arrangement of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles a large clamp, because it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And so these instruments are strong that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and wise masters subtly find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, because there are some illnesses where the ancient ones did not teach at all about an instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it breaks not a cartilage or other bones, or it decays, if one searches for the instruments that one needs, which I have told you, and helps with the gestures, because it is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And so they are large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and ostrude; and then restore the place of convenient medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, if it seems that you know the teeth are not arranged after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make them straight or aligned: then take this instrument which has a similar form, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron with an acute point.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the blunt point is held little by little in the mornings for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can make them straight, then sharpen a part of the file according to its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the mornings gently, so that it does not move until it is steady; then smooth out the roughness at the end without any irregularity, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it seems to make them even, so they do not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth locks
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	Here is the translation:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, if you reset it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it who is not wise and suffers, and never makes the form of a tooth of cattle, and you put it back in its place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and it stays there for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of covering the lien of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Never is it the lien that comes from under the tongue or naturally, that you are born with it; or by accident of a wounded plague; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous lien of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is dryness or numbness, and it is suddenly a plague, if you apply the unguent and cover with a large bandage; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done, lift the place of water rose and of sage, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a piece of linen; and tie the patient's every night, so that they cannot sleep. And if blood comes out, apply vitriol powder on the spot; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the flesh of a foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it declines into a bluish color, and there is moisture, apply the unguent, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver one part and another; and if the blood does not stop with your work, apply vitriol powder so that it is stained, then return to your work until you treat everything fully; then lift the place of sage and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes abscesses come in the throat called "godath", and they are properly named .ij. amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, be cautious: if it's an abscess hard of small sense and of fused color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of blood corruption; but let it be until it ripens, and then you will break it open, or it would burst by itself; and if it is of white color reont, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover, but first examine whether the abscess has cooled down and is appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be in a healthy position, and open their mouth and take the scissors between their hands, and press the tongue under all the instruments, so it is in the right form; and let it be of silver or thin copper as one uses a lancet.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onguine and fix it in the amandre, and draw it forth more than you can; and draw nothing from the tiles with, then cover with the instrument, so it is in the right form, which seems like a force; and all the way the head is curved, and one end to another, and are very agile, and made of iron indeed or of silver:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover with a bandage, so it is in the right form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	Here is the translation:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Here is the translation:
de l’uve	of the hive
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the hive is deep inside, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called a "hive". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme wounds are alleviated, and it is subtle; then you must cut according to its bluntness and length. And if it is sanguine or of a fusse color or black, then you must make an incision on it. For there is great peril for the patient. Then, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, considering its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument we made mention of before; then put the needle in the hive, and draw it out, and cut with the .ij. instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the .ij. wounds. And beware not to cut more than the superfluous part beyond the natural term; for if you cut too much, it will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. wounds, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient has a fear of cutting, then beware to use fire cautery with a gentle touch. And the manner of cautery is sharp and subtle. And it is that the patient puts their head in your hands, and then presses their tongue against the instrument we have said or the chapter on cautery, and confirms with a lively movement, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing this instrument, according to its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have a head or put the medicine on it, as if you were stirring with a spoon, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the hive; and the patient should lean on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not go down to the throat and the bladder; then hold your hand all over the medicine and press on the hive for a quarter of an hour, until you see it becoming numb and the pungency of the medicine is alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument all around the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the hive; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait afterwards for .iiij. days or .v.. And if you need to reapply the cautery of the medicine, reapply it, and after the cautery suck out the excess from the hive, with cotton plugged into a hole, and clean what is around the medicine; and be aware of the cold frost, and be cured of gagging as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and let the instrument be cleaned in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, you will often recommence, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do it more than at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in its head a piece of egg white, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some thing; therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the language to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing; and what does not appear and is retained in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be rejected through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will be recognized, and then you will treat further; and if it does not come from what we have said, take the instrument of plummet in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high lifted; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all does not go well, nor does it get stuck inside; and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, because it will be inserted or the thing is easier; if it gets stuck below, where it draws equally throughout the entire instrument, until it is drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the sensitivity of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is suitable for the sensitivity, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw it out with a small hook, or subtle tenaculi that are suitable for this. And if it is not suitable, take a hooked cane, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert or remove with the hooked cane, making a hot iron, and do it frequently. And if you grasp the patient's aquosity throughout the day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and insert it so that it swallows, and move it with their hand frequently; and if you feel the sensitivity senses the aquosity, shout.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not shout as we have said, then fumigate the patient with absinthium, at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will fall without tiring. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are charcoal vis, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that pierced place let the head of the instrument be; then you throw the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will fall now, and if it does not shout, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then the doctor will be master that it is driven out by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the wound, if it is, when one can see it, resembles curved tongs entering into the gorge; and it has a resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size; and it is in two manners, one of which is in its own resemblance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second manner is through the veins where they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if an abscess is not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is ripe according to its fulfillment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are raw, and do not ripen according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are porous within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one pierces it so that it becomes ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a raw abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is in the foundation, which does not become porous within, and becomes fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hole of the perforation of the abscess which is mortified according to completion, and it's when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminishing of pain and of redness, and the debating and adjusting of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equally or there is no putridity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worth more that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, then the body will be nourished by the venom from it, and it will be full of much foulness; and perhaps the lips and the deepest parts of it will harden. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to how the members have need of it.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to recognize universally in the treatment of abscesses: where you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the skin of the head becomes small abscesses, and there are ways to treat them that are in tiles, just like a gellied joint, and many have similar appearances. There are fat ones and those with moisture, just like poulz; and if there are hard and piercing ones at the cutting edge, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary. And the work of the cutting is that you try everything .i. instrument that is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then they do so above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape without leaving the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns immediately if one leaves nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and this cures what has been delayed from the night. And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay from the night; then treat the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it is healthy. And if the abscesses hold .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, above the length; and apply your own judgment, and scrape everywhere, and put all your care into treating the wound where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, then do what I have told you afterwards. And also do the same for the abscess if it is piercing, and at the cutting edge and at treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting above the piercing abscess and the moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head or where there is no moisture, and those were .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman's head; and found the abscess like a pierced stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had not made any effort, one would have done well to make a wound like a pierced stone. In other abscesses coming onto the head, for those that come as heads of children and roots of the ears, the treatment should be done within three days at most, depending on the patient, in order to remove the swelling; and the cure should be done as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the swellings
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times an abscess forms on the neck, and sometimes beneath the arms, and in the groin area, but never in other parts of the body. And they are numerous, and entwined with each other. Each swelling is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these swellings are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case where you see good disposition in the touch, and it appears like the color of the body, and changes in each part, and is not airy as the veins on the neck nor in the artery, nor in the conduit; it is not deep; then you must cut above them, and strip away each part, and open the two lips of the heart as once, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and proceed little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not become too confident, lest you touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into a vein or an artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put vitriol ointment on the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then inquire by your index finger if there remain small swellings, and cut and dress them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the swelling, do not think that you should cut into that swelling at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harming; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut into the entire swelling, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there remains no superfluousness due to the greatness of the swelling. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and treat it firmly, and sew as we have said. Those swellings that hold superfluousness, pierce it where it appears most dead; and pierce it thus, as previously stated, depending on it, then anoint it with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, heal it with ointment, softening the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de squinance	of scalping
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men said and spoke of the surgical operation on the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have scalping, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleared; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the arm of the patient are at those who have an abscess burning in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Here is the translation:
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and thus the veins are found to be obstructed at the section of the epiglottis so that there is no flow of blood, and the vessels are long from the inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then cut through the cartilage as far as it reaches the trachea; and clear the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then touch the syphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the pipe of the trachea which is furrowed by the air that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with good care, and sew all along without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One should not delay this just so long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be mortal, and the default is the failure of the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then one should cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this reason the wise man commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or in four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they command to cauterize the wound and to cure it, until it is cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinew of the forearm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been covered with a bandage or dressing other than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cared for it until it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and had not harmed the maiden, for she was hoarse of voice, and recovered afterwards to her normal state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I saw that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and they are very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two methods: natural, and accidental; or naturally it has no remedy.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two methods, one of which seems like a thick tumor to us, and the other method seems like an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and he has fear, and it is not suitable to work with fire cautery except on small areas, and he proves and searches everywhere for the introverted:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I do, no fat grows, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if you touch, if you touch as we do, and you pull at all its coating, if there is a point;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and heal it as it suits, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways of healing are ours, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I tell all the difference that exists between them and us.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the issue is fever and heat, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then set aside the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the patient having no heat nor fever nor pain, and containing .i. syrup, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to similarities, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to its shape whether it comes from a chapter or a master.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the wounds is that you take or touch the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you feel that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the "entromissoire", and take care that it does not fall out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	Here is the translation:
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entrails come moisture, knows that it is fat, if they make a cross then, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the skin where it lies that you may pull it straight with the nail;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it straight, then pull it by pieces so that nothing remains there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains there, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it stays there a little while, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and hold the wound steady, and put soothing things on the aposteme, and treat other wounds as long as they are healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is serious, thus he should cut the edges of the wound, and cure those who are injured by the char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is beating against the contrary or otherwise, hasten and employ the virtue of vitriol ointment, and let it be for 2 or 3 days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what has been delayed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Behold the forms of inward instruments, and they are of 3 kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are 4 quarters that are called "albaret", and 1 that is called "breb", and there are 3 kinds: large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrin iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in cutting into black stone to encircle the curves of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have three curves of three manners also.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are onions that have three curves, and they are also of three manners; and if there are onions that have two curves, and onions with a single curve only, and they are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these onions that one cuts are trenchant, and of such ones there are those who do not cut more than a part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introducers are the scabs that form on the skin, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use more force than in the flesh of a lamb, as with legs, and arms, and hands, and fingers, and similar limbs;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make another small instrument resembling the scales of a fist, according to this form, where one stains blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it in a place that is healthy at the junction of the veins, and at the arteries, and never again goes against this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never inflame the breasts of certain men when they begin to be corrupt, so that they seem like breasts of women;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they swell and become inflamed, and those who want to cure them, if it is suitable to treat according to this form of this line up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine inwardly in the wound, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound to the seam, and treat until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if he has a wounded arm, it is ameliorated by its greatness just like they have with women, if they make an .ij. curve above, through .ij. similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and mix in what we have said about poultices and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, so that it be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it so long as it diminishes the remainder and the fat, then cure it so that it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of ulcers
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the ulcers are types of hard scrofulous lumps where there is moisture, and it is only this that contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire boil that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until another day, then remove all the cotton, and heal the wound by applying ointment so that it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do as we have said in treating scrofula, and if the wound becomes a boil, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses come, and also it happens that the inflamed vein and abscess occur.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you know it then as much as it is through the artery, so are the abscesses long in front;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the constriction; and when it is through the vein, it is those things that appear deformed;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the ribs and in the corners and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and the one who is at the head must choose also, and in the one who has an inflammation of the artery, they make it above the skin of the loin;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the wound skillfully, and separate the artery from the tendons, so that it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce until the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the place which is between the two ligaments of an intramuscular area, so that the blood flows out of it, and thus release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then adjust the treatment so that the wound heals quickly, until the ligament is strong.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wounds that come from it, so they are healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can take from the abscess to all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there is a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of the threads from the double thread, which goes from one side to the other side through the flesh;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, so rebury another needle entirely under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four layers;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut away the superfluity of bad blood and let what is linked remain;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a clean dressing of millet in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it often happens that the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and this is the grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of a dead body, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is strongly strained, the patient feels pain, and it is not nearly as deep in the body, but beneath the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it must be examined well from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither above nor below, and one who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin grow on the sputumile (possibly a term for a type of abscess or tumor).
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, you hold it with tongs, and cut at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, you suspend it from the anvil, and scrape, then remove the bone and bring the wound together at the seam, and treat until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of large, hanging lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	It never happens in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had a wound on his belly that was more like a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had a small root, and was already split open, and was corroding from excessive moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I touched them and found in one 18 ounces heavy, and in the other 6 ounces, and the wounds in the incision are such that you see if the patient's moisture is excessive, and the color of the artifact is pale and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in your presence the fire cautery. For when the surgeon often causes too great a flow of blood, and if the senses do not fail you, then hasten to give the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient is fainting and afraid of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the artifact as we have said, and leave it 8 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then restrain, and do not cease from restraining the thread of the splint until it touches the joint, and hold it in place without effort; and if the roots are thick, then you should carefully cover them for the sake of the belly, but you can barely cover half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	Here is the translation:
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is by the softness of the skin and the issuance of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issuances.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issuance of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it resists, and then returns, and perhaps it is dry, and greatly increases at the entry of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are that you look at its appearance, whether it is by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Here is the translation:
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and let it be stretched out straight, then sign from the navel all around the bowel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he should sit comfortably between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place that you have signed to the entire spine,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then stretch out the half of the abscess downwards towards the whole large ulcer;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then he ties behind with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk strongly, and it is the we give him a firm hold;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open most of the abscess extended above the thread, and you thrust your finger inside, and you examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it taken hold of the thread, if it dislodges, and thrusts the intestine into the depth of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, if it takes hold of the navel, and you cut off the excess flesh;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and you make the artery counterflow, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and you thrust nine forces of thread, and thrust the nine needles inward so that you have done in a cross that you make perceive;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as much as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you touch when it is subtle and putrefied, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and sew up the limb.
dou chancre	swollen tumor
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the symptoms of tumors, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should remove the iron cure; and we say that the tumor is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when a tumor is in the body or where it can be reached if it is like a tumor which is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one should totally remove it when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it; no one has ever healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in the body or where it can be reached, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make them healthier if they show repletion, then affect the patient .i. by making an incision in a good place to perform the operation; then cut out all the tumors and all the flesh, and remove all the bone without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and squeeze well with your hand or any other thing, and if the removal of blood makes you feel uneasy about cutting into the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is stanched; then apply another treatment until they are healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	Here is the translation:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look to see if the hydropisy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel .iii. two fingers from the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then let your incision be on the left side of the navel .iii. fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then it should be on the right, and do not make the patient move towards the incision so that the superfluidities do not flow towards the weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Here is the translation:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top is the almond, if it happens that the struments come to the water, then they sink now on the instrument; empty the donor of the half or third part, because if you empty more than it doesn't fit in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls asleep, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to the dispositions of the virtue that the patient's signs indicate, and his pulses; then pull the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cord that stops up the passage that is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and pull from the water a small quantity.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do it no day, and keep from fooling as long as it doesn't stay but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let much water, if the cure of the burial or warm bath, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and if you abstain from drinking; and the cure with desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Here is the translation:
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, with their head at the end of the rod and the cope thus like the length of a pen, so that the perforator cuts in the middle, as it should; and beware of the efflux of blood which often occurs, and if it happens, then staunch what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it happens that you take them with a subtle onion, and cleanse all with copes, then put on cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the cyst is malignant, of bad color and putrid, then it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have cleansed it, and the cyst is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the cyst which is inside first; and when it is soothed, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the rod will not be perceived, and there comes blackness and corruption in the rod and in the conjunction; then it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour which has been prepared with scorched grains and veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the flow of blood comes, then master the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries are helpful in two dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must insert or conduct a tube of plum into the rod, and pour the patient through; and when the skin is burned at the end of the rod which has not been circumcised, either from wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument that cuts the veins, so that they are freed and released from the head of the rod on all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with a spatula at the end of the rod and of the skin; then disengage slowly between two, and I put a subtle drapery of linen on the milled anvil in cold water, so that it does not become hot again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Here is the translation:
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	When one recovers from a burn, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers' breadth where it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance striking the iron, and corrupting the vein, and many times it grows thus that they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the modification that is made to all the thread of the file I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in .i. the whole soul strains; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the infant think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer by tying the thread around the rod so gently, and then you make it slide in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or make a circle, and pull it up as high as the top of the rod is in; then mundify well the order that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below .i. one thread to another; and hold it as .ij. you do by the second ligature at the pouchet and at the index finger, and join between the .ij. threads, then lift the circle above hastily and pull the top of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedies; and put powder on top and on the powder .i. a drapery glued with a mixture of egg white cooked at the same time as rose water, confited with oil of rose balsam and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure with another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be tender and cutting, and the heads should be as large as the evenly matched hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the mundification is when the heart within fails at the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch to your finger, so that the liquids make an abscess; and the evenly matched joint, and if you cannot hold with your finger, then take the tendons, and then the joint.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts three days, and what is beneath the rod is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and scrape lightly; then joint as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, which will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the wound with powders, which we have said or treat with powders, and if you joint beyond measure, and it goes to the depths, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of the bowel, or of a new flesh, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and extend their belly upwards from behind their back, and stretch out the patient's hips as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above, which is why the urine is discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", whose form is: and let it be of subtle silver, lightweight and polished, like a bird's feather; and let the tube be one palm long and half, and let it be subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or scissors, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the thread and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on a chair, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist oil and olive oil and clear water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then put the syringe lightly in the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the bowel; then insert the syringe before just reaching the bladder, and feel the patient coming to the thing voided, and that is not done according to this order for fear that the conduits or it will be twisted; then stretch the thread along the entire thread little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then it flows freely, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and insert the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the scorching blood comes into the bladder, or porridge is assembled, and you have seen distilled waters and medicines, if you do all the instruments which are called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if you have two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leeches suck because the medicine should be such that it stops well the sperm without addition, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and thrust when the mast is;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you have poured your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the irrigator in the moisture, and draw out the drawing instrument that is within; if you draw out the moisture with the irrigator, and then strongly thrust the drawing instrument within; if the moistures enter within, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle cluster with which one clusters the bladder: thus it is;
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below that, there are the sinewy veins; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with moisture as you see fit to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a double-wound thread, and heat that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the clister in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder throughout the entire moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has come into the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes into the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in January as rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a tailor's skill; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	Here is the translation:
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient thoroughly by catheter, for clearing all the filth that is in their intestines. For it often hinders the quest of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and let them sit down and move to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and often falls from the high place; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands are below their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then seek and touch it from inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the bladder, then hasten to cut into the stone. And if it does not yield to the touch of everything, then anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your left hand, if the patient is young and accomplished; and insert it into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then push it towards the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and insert it into the area where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand above the loins, and with their left hand hold the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where the cut is made; then they insert the spatula, which has this shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between this which is between the hip and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both are thus or fundament, and let the cutting be so that it is large by default, and within is constricted, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	by chance the press if both are where the fundament is, so that it feels the sensation of labor; and know that there is part of stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is grievous to issue; and if there is a part which is underneath, similar to a glance, and rounded, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	At that place where it has angles and margin, make the cutting larger; and if it does not feel, then you must extract from the tendons which are like a lime at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put beneath it the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the hole of the perforator, and if the sense is not deceived, then extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there are more than one stone, then put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract it, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, then you must operate, and make a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the bed that the eyes cannot hold; but in any case, you exert yourself to extract, or to break up the tendons, as long as you extract it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on a dressing of soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, stir well the oil and water, then apply the treatment of dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and putrefy.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then apply the plaster of water and of isa and ofasil, and aid it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, you tie the hips, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the penis is small, and it is led by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot come out; if you cure this as I say, that you cut many times, it is an excuse for cutting per this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a rod of iron in this form and it should be at three angles fixed in the thigh:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and wind it around the rod beneath the penis, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis, until it reaches the penis; and turn the rod with your hand in the penis little by little, so that you can pierce the penis from another part; if soon the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the penis which is inside the rod. If it is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this because of some obstacle that bothers him, then thread the rod beneath the penis and another above, then make the rod straight in the penis between the three ligaments, then extract it forcibly, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until he is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone is generated in women, and if it happens sometimes, the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who discovers herself as mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-informed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stones of women are more hidden than those of men, because they conceal themselves with deeper cuts, and great fear is there.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a well-informed midwife, and hold the true faith in her, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle and chaste mirror; and she presents a wise and knowledgeable life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command of the inquiry into the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her hand or finger on the stone; and if she finds it, if she feels it beneath her finger, and recommend that she puts her hand or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in this way.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she must move it gently from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft spot, where it is moved and appears, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her finger on the stone or beneath, and so it will be smaller at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the ruler on the wound, if you feel the stone it increases the pain so much that the stone may come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to be known, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. if you know the similarities to recognize the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the stone does not come out, then put on the vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as helpers to aid you in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if he has no sense of vanity, and it's from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the wound and strain with tentes and bandages, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it again, lest the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the limbs are at rest, then return to your work, until the stone be removed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white syphac, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, which contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it's the skin of the thigh between the white syphac that we have said; and this does not have small non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads through that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or swollen as we have said, the abscesses are ripe, like a long boil figuring an egg, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own tissue, the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another boil.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you test at every corner of the joint, because its shape is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to that which comes after the joint, judge from that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should be placed on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and much of the drapery is put beneath him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he should sit on his left, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the joint.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the white spot where it pricks, and make your incision entirely straight while cutting the skin of the joints up to the point where it becomes white, and carefully scrape off the thin layer beneath.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white spot plain with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then put in your onguines, and let the white spot be above; and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the white spot should; cut out all or by pieces very subtly the cartilage of it, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the swelling subside for a certain time, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the two leaves of the core of the joints at one suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the swelling corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspended places, and remove the swelling, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if it is assembled in two parts, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equalization, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft cloth soaked in rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on top another soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put above the two cushions, and put above double wraps, and tie it all together with the bandage that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two wraps, and fill them with cloth scraps according to this resemblance and sew them together at the throat of the arms, and one of the hands takes hold of the foundation just up to the back, and the other part at the thumb; and another takes hold of the two angles, and so the entire restraint is assembled in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and often is medicated this branch of cautery with a size of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the joints, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the aigue is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take fire cautery according to this method, and pierce the skin with an onion-like shape, and scrape it with this subtle fire cautery technique:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the scalp in all ways that you can, as much as you stretch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg whites; and know that this work is more salvageable; and beware of the removal of blood, and avoid the operations of size;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or removals of blood or other things, then cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it be for a while to correct the remaining water, then cure until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if you put a clean cloth to prevent the water from coming out of the mouth of the wound, so it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one draws out the watery discharge, because its shape is thus beforehand; and enlarges a little the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or even more, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there are many more dispositions to fear, because it seems to me that they are worth more than what I have left.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad humors; and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by the excess of bitter and sour humors, which is spread through bad humors, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is an ugly abscess, painful and piercing, with a dark color, and sometimes it comes from a blocked artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to a blocked artery, it is recognized by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not think that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its disposition at the expression of tender touch of the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well make the incision according to this likeness, and on the other wounds;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the loins, then place the egg upwards, and pull the white skin backwards, and release the suspender on all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already sewn with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you pull the egg, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the skin, or in that which is within the veins, then it is necessary that you release all of this tension, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, it is necessary that you cut all, and extract the pus, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are accomplished, apply the plaster of softening oil and rose oil, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like formation resembling a pustule, with softening of the groin.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient must complain greatly when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is very near to the fear that was before;
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in all ways we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then put the suspensorium of the loins below his two thighs,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	for all the vessels which are near the edge, and touch the masters, and stretch them out forcibly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the spot where the vessels are, until they are uncovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein is located, and then tie it again to the other head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then they cauterize in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as if with others or by anointing with a bolt, so that no vessel bursts which nourishes one of the intestines.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this, there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the syphac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disease are through the passage that comes from the syphac, or the extension to the belly in the region of the loins, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the flanks;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this treatment is from the syphac, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of movement come from several causes: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a strain, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the syphac, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and they are equal abscesses right up to the perforation, because the spleen presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the spleen, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and they are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the corpse in failure of the spleen.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained in the gut, and causes great suffering pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments of fear, because they intend to escape from it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to reach with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on their neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the joints from the long bone.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the strips of the belt, according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes may issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the dead skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the white dead skin may be uncovered on all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white dead skin that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second dead skin,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second dead skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white dead skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the dead skin near the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and separate what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you have two fingers if it has a point of the intestine wrapped or white and hard, and if you find nothing, then thrust into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle where it has a large thread made of ten threads, and put the point in the rear part of the skin, which is after the skin of the thighs; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, so that there are three threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the skin, which we have said is under the skin of the thighs, with a strong thread of two threads.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two threads, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest an abscess forms and does not heal.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the thread in order according to the first long thread of two inches from that one, and after these two threads leave the skin which is under the skin of the thighs a large amount of an inch.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and afterwards all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as long as the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then anoint the soft mass with oil, and put in wounds, and I anoint the vein that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is it cauterized, the vein thus, as we have said, after the incision, by fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it happens often, and let the vein until it chooses for itself; and if it tarries in the wound, so be aroused by warm water, and put on that which we have said, until it chooses.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, so it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it was done in the same way as the hernia that is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the veins, after cutting slightly beneath the skin.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then examine me, and treat the abscess of those who have a swelling, until the veins are clear; and treat it as we have said, until they are healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No rupture occurs in the angles, as we have said, and opens the joints; and do not dissect any of the intestines to the abdomen, and if you do dissect them, it's little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always if it stays too long at this point, the wound or ulceration grows, until the intestines dissect;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and that which has been extended by the ulceration which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes soft and inflates the joints and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then cup the affected area of the swollen vein according to the quantity of two or three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the superficial skin which is beneath the skin that is swollen, then take the vein and place it on the apparent area of the vein;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two visible veins of the vein on the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover a single point of the swollen area that does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you understand in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cover the edges, if it is undermined and heals the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swollen area is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the groin
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Here is the translation:
dou chastrement	do cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des hermofrodites	of the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hemorrhoid is of two kinds as follows: one is that between the buttocks appears as the figure of a woman's nature, where it has hair, and sometimes it constricts the urine.  And the other kind is in women, and it appears on the nipple like a rod with two buttocks.  And the treatment for men and women is that you cauterize all the affected areas, and treat them as other wounds; in the second kind, of those whose urine jumps through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tetany
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tetany is a cauterized area on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluousness of the tetany from your hand or from the joints, and treat it lightly; and do not apply too much pressure, lest the blood vessels burst, then treat with another treatment until it is healthy; and there is another area that grows at the mouth of the thigh, and it swells, and by chance it jumps out, and it is similar to a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you treat it, just as we have said about tetany, and treat it until it is healthy.
de erratique	of cautery fire command to the patient that they let the hairs grow so long and equal;
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come into the marrow, such as chancre and pierous abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak of the hot abscess that comes into the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that take hold suddenly; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess has begun with a swelling, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red you can see. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is alleviated; and then seat the patient on .i. siege, and have .ij. small sieges or he inclines, and supports himself on his back and gathers his feet as parts of the leg; and are his hips expanded, and puts his arms beneath his knees, and binds them well with a linen thread; then suck out the fluid from the right side, and I will show you the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the marrow, so that afterwards it forms; and it is necessary that when you have operated this instrument, you fix the rule first in order to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument on top, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand mol, it is necessary to cover at the chief, at spatumile leit; and when the boil is empty, it is necessary that you put ten moistened oil rosset, or green oil sec; and put the tent on top of the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put beneath the marrow and beneath the clear nettle moistened in water or mallow so they are cooked; then cure afterwards .ij. days of ointment coming to that, until it is healthy; and no time lift the marrow and the wound by applying a paste of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and aristologe long so they are cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound has fallen into the marrow, it is necessary that you guard yourself from cauterizing with iron, but cure thus as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes onto its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of the child are feeble, then make it sit on a saddle, or the women hold it; and anoint its nature with oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the bath between its two small spamuliles which is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and swaddle the second one, and cut its nail as much as the moisture that is in the cord was; and press the woman's belly as much as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesament; then make her take and hold it firmly, and hold its mouth and nose for an hour: if the infant is now born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the birth of a child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infants come onto their feet, if they want to walk upright;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just above the elbows, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps further, then God wants.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump further as we have said, then turn it little by little, so that it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of hot water, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush everything into a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the natural woman within and remove this joint,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make it sit in water up to the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is moistened below, make a girdle of myrrh for it, and put it below, and leave it an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make it sit on the chair, then make it stretch and hold its mouth and nose, and take its belly lightly, for now it will breathe easily.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if it puts its hands to its mouth little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then it is supported on its neck, and the feet hang down, and it lies stretched out on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and folds its hands little by little, and then takes its hands on the belly, and lifts the cushions from underneath, so that it is prepared below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he cannot walk, take his feet and form a mold, then shape the belly above, then put your hands on it;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold of him so that the child will settle.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes out with a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must skillfully bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot reset it, make the woman lift up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs in the shape of a fork.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then massage the muscle I have mentioned.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she cannot bear it, make her sit on a chair, then study how to reset the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and examine the child according to its natural shape, and make it straight, and instruct it to take hold as much as the infants issue forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child upon its neck, and has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that you should touch the child's hand, then turn it little by little, and rock it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is aligned, place on the natural muscular movement of the hip and thigh, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, let it sit on the chair, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the second ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for all the second ones, if you cut the second one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and let the veins sit on its face and on its neck, if you cut from the bud, so that it is not retained, and kill the veins;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child back inside, as long as you have placed it well, and instruct the woman to take care not to expel it at any time.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it will be easier to straighten afterwards.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes only one is born; it is not a strange thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live, if they have a little name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syllable which divides them, which is tied to the bundle;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never do they issue naturally as a whole, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath be made, and make it thick and light as it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as he values his health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6, or many up to 15, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is clear that the wise old man knows all this, for it seems that he has experienced similar things;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if you do according to what is suitable.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to operate with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is suitable that you know the woman's true condition, and there has been no accident or she has fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her knees be inclined downwards, and her legs lifted.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the thigh in two places, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the womb with moist ointments made from altaea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the belly with these ointments and these muskings;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then put them in the womb lightly, then seek .i. the place where she puts the fingers that are suitable for this;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take heed when the veins are apparent, so they descend to their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you touch the veins in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the gullet or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descents are on his feet, touch them or prick them and these moist places;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the vein with his right hand, and put the curve between the two fingers of his left hand, and let all his hand be light, and touch the vein in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it's the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix an encounter with another onion, where the third is in a similar mastery, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are set in motion equally on one side and the other, to make them issue, and let the onions be held by threads, as it is their shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it remains a point, set this onion or higher up on him, and make them do so that they issue completely forth.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be led back by straightening.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	so you must wrap it in a bandage, so that it becomes whole.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the cup on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and in this way.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the issue, or it has an assembled sharp head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then you must put the spinous spatula between the two, and make the head straight and extract the sharp part;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you round it at the instrument called "almidach", whose form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in this way, I make the children have a great natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones for their tendons,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head jumps out and it is held by the forceps, so it be broken, until the moisture that is or worse comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces in the muscles where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the patient is standing on their feet, it is a light attraction, and the adjustment at the mouth of the marrow is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you straighten it with a draped enveloping sheet on the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrodes.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are numb, and the head remains.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he puts an onion or two, and draws it forcibly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be operated on;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then you must apply moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and he applies plasters, and it is in watery softening and moisturizing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then apply what we have said about the living infant.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and so that one cannot have power, if one treats the fever by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary treatment.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then apply what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the flow of blood comes, it should be placed in a warm bath, and the other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a dead fetus had been, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead ones.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension, abscesses came to the skin, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a poultice of strong attraction, and I drew out a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound, and drew out many bones, until the woman was in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and he examines the woman's long tense muscles, and then immediately adds a little warmth from the cow.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not found this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the thigh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one has the books; and at .ij. turning as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Here is the translation:
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the box be four fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one and a half palms long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and inside the limbs should be two adjustments of this same box, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenacules.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two joints, if you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you open the marrow to the entire instrument, if it happens to sit the woman on .i. bed, her feet hanging and her legs stretched out;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to the entire instrument, if you have done the adjustments equally, according to the quantity that you saw open the mouth of the marrow, so that the vein makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all superior, and they are multiplied in their similarities; and when the masters have them prepared, so much is the work hastened, and higher is the esteem of men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to hold their arm, and then make them extend it with ease, and hold their hands by the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let it jump through that, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If you do not take it, he takes the pot and makes perforations or a cup, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the disease, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centauri.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cane or perforations on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the disease.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the steam as long as the vapors come out of the disease; then make it sterile, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary treatment is urgent.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal, then instruct the patient to dirty their left hand in the oil of sesame or in massage of altaea, and then apply it to the affected area.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek the second one; and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the marrow does not burst at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then drawn out; if it comes and dislodges itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted there, we have described the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and it is not part of all that we have said, if you beware so that you do not fall into the trap;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the veins, you bind it to the thigh of the woman, then anoint it with ointment of four ingredients;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if you will open and reset it, and come to an agreement; but nevertheless, when it will open thus, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and injures the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then it is necessary to use fumigations of cubeba roots for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of fresh cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similar to a cane, and put the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tinge as long as it is roasted, and recommend another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it is understood that they are subtly affected.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary then to apply a poultice that it perceives the subtle effect at its finger, and does not perceive it as a stimulus of agitation, and adjusts the bandage so it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not restore, then put or insert a tube of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this suddenly happens with a blow of a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cover that sudden blow: if it is cured, as we have said about the treatment of a pointed wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are a swelling, and those that come from beneath the foundation of the fundament, or in the space of the aforementioned parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is a fistula or more; and when that swelling is old, it works, and likewise moistures the white or subtle ulcer,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by the fact that they come from a bad digestion or flatulence when the patient has indigestion, and by chance they burst forth suddenly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis, and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the bottom, and it does not pass through.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your indexed finger at the bottom, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has tortuosity, if you apply a subtle tent of plank, or a horsehair, so long as you feel the tent or hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from a perturbed egestion nor windiness nor truth, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that she does not perceive anything; if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and cannot be restrained by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived just up to the joint of the thigh, then it is the tendon coming just to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, then it is that he has inwardly bowed, and there is no medicine nor sudden relief by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the foolish doctors who interfere with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then place a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as much as you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if then the tent has perceived it; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can almost always heal some wounds, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one makes, if it is that one removes the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and thrust all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized wounds are like a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of many wounds in a burr, as long as that chart is firm, then the treatment of jointing by softening and reinforcing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, it is good. See that, otherwise it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the hold a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the finger;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut again before the hold, and then apply the cautery, as long as it reaches the head of the hold;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and it will be delivered the tent, and fall; then I will find those worn-out flesh that seem a bird's feather, and none of them remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, and becomes thick between you and the skin, then cauterize with fire or medicine against the fever.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cauterizes assemble these things: it is to know, the art of these joined flesh, and the stoppage of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken pieces, until the eyes gaze downward, and issue forth the flesh burnt in the mud.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed from hot charcoal, and these are dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the deep foundation, and it is separated from the body, you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the fabric or the syphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are not more than one way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the fundament, or if you can place and treat it as at first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the fontanel, so you do not cut the holding that holds the fundament, and come to the evacuations by the sensitive direction willingly;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the bandage afterwards since it is cut from the fundament, or by tension or another appointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then define this faulty charter which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound, and to hold back the fistula in the part that undermines the foundation: if it is something lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the skin above is eaten away by the ulcer.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the thread through, and insert the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the bottom foundation within, then extract the thread from that which is pierced, so that you push your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head of the thread, and join the edges of the fistula together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it back no more than necessary, so that the thread grips these flesh parts that are between the two, and sticks together.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pass through, then make it pass through in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the ulcerous place if it is deeply embedded, and then heal it, as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal vertebrae from which one makes the fistula is very much affected by one, partly and cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, because one does not understand what one should not touch, if you see here:
des emorroydes	of the bruises
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Bruises are in two ways: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they burst out blood suddenly,
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are far from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are far have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and immediately afterwards, a drop of citrus water or a drop of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves by going into chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and they seem to produce threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and it grips like tendrils, or you hold it on your finger, then it crops into its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and the uncle cannot hold them due to their moisture, if they take them in a wrapping of cloth, or a piece of camlet, or a fragment of chamelot;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them with your fingers, then cover them, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said or according to the chapter on cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot be opened, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and bitter cluster to remove what is in the foundation, so that it can open easily;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient takes a breath, and if the thread is pulled from the foundation, then it is an easy treatment;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them in your finger or with tongs, and grasp them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you apply the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too large; and hold the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the excessive flow of blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a piece of cloth soaked in oil or rose water or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it be until it heals, and when they are healed, if they receive treatment of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you should search for the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a searching of veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you make a point of a spatula or on an angle the scorching above, which does not let it get moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then the treatment as long as it is swollen as it happens;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot swell, then restart the rubbing more forcefully than before, as long as it hurts a lot and becomes scarred;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
dou fremit	for trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Here is the translation:
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it like a dead finger, and it comes into the whole body, and more in the hands than another part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a thread of an owl's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place that thread on the finger, so that the circles totally encircle the finger.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the thread so that you enclose the entire finger, and put it in the front, and stretch the finger out of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a ring of copper or iron in this form, and be subtle below and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, for you must hold to the finger, and press; And if you see, if you cauterize the frenum, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of theclyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make aclyster of silver or copper, or of tin alloy or maille; and never make these small and large instruments, according to those who are accustomed to them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that one uses in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above wide, where the abdomen is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a separation or the abdomen is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has a perforation on one side .ij., and on the other side .i.;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the abdomen be where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and let it be perceived entirely around small perforations,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let there be between each perforation .i. a space of an inch, then put in these perforations .i. strong thread of twisted cord strongly knotted in .x. or around, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a sack;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is within, if he administers it with an instrument in front of a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then apply it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the minister holds it with his two hands together, so that it be fully visible, then extracts the cautery, and lifts the patient's legs to the partition.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to issue, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps a night in total, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him for a disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to exit, so recommend it as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the morbid matters are at the bottom, or an abscess, so let the cluster be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the shape of the subtle cluster on which the skin should be held firm:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword and a knife, or with a lance or a stick or a bramble, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if take care it's a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you suspect a slight abscess: if it makes the headache worse from the cephalic membrane meanwhile it comes little blood from the wound, and the pain is on the contrary of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and the patient is exhausted by an excess of wine and coarse meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to get better, let his meat be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if abscesses or ulcers come, clean them with oil rose water softly, or in wine steeped.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess or ulcer, put on the wound, so it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will tell a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments, so it may be healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by themselves, then assemble them by suturing, as I will tell about wounds of the belly, and the suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it breaks, and no longer holds except for a little, thus it cures; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat, as if they are eating and roasting cooked food, like they are eating poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten skin or putrid flesh, and it does not adhere to the bone, thus cut out all the rotten part, and throw it away, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has become infected in the wound or vein, without crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, thus cauterize the infection, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit him, then he must be cauterized.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; living chalk three parts, and powder subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the poultice to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, so that it adheres well and joins with all its sap.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then leave it alone, and let it not become inflamed; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes a poultice of hot chalk, when one does not have the incense nor the blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved the wound, similarly in this case, then do not put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested oils, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it has a good flow.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of other treatments until he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it steady with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between the two heads of the wound, but if the veins or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the veins, if there is no other remedy than to let them bleed, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the veins and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the veins is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soothing, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in warm water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other fingers of mine according to this manner, and wet bandages.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce or cut below the swelling.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is the practice.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is wounded, or the neck, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the food goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the neck on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and let it be for some days, then cure the wounds of the flesh thoroughly until it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are fragments of bone, if you pull them out quickly, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound purifies,
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it be uncovered and aligned the joint;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has become putrid, for the patient will soon languish: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not putrid, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put on the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and open the patient's eyes.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put on an attractive bandage, and bind it three times a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or two days, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of heart in the translations of the vein;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and make an effort, especially if there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the foot or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed on the bone, and has caught pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the false fibers if they are detached.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislocated, let the wound putrefy, then align the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and other wounds on other limbs are the judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the great wound often bursts out a piece of intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, because of their internal insertion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more painful, and often it is worse than the small wound that is the large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because when one puts back together the intestines in, one does not put them back together from hot to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, if they return to their place,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because of this it is necessary to treat the wounded place, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common stitches have a place in the stitching of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitching of other wounds of the body and four other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are more prone to having a rupture of the belly, and I will describe one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has fallen out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and a grievous thing is to put it back, this is by one of the three methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	for it is because the intestine is inflamed by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is chilled, warm it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soften a sponge or a cloth with water and apply it gently,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	where you cook in water simmering and steeping and infusion,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until the swelling goes down;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this wine restrains, and it is murderous that one should not drink to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling subside, if you moisten the intestine with water or warm wine and bad humors are cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for it is aligned, the entrance to a little of something;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument of the thing which one takes hold of to stop the hemorrhages;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to deaden that which is cut,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we must not cut without great necessity for it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments to make a division:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut deeply into the curve and do not digress, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it according to its natural form in its own place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	see if you can put it back, for that is worth a lot.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is located beneath the belly.
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and it is located beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	Here is the translation:
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is on one of the parts.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you make an incision in that case where the injured part should be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for large wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what you have prepared.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then you have between your hands, I minister pitifully who pulls all the treatment to his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it is the common manner of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then let the skin of the wound heal, I give you a space of an inch, and I fix a needle where it has a good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the two heads of the siphac with the three threads in a bundle;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then he tightens with a double thread within the needle of the .ij. parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble the .ij. heads of the wound together afterwards,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave .i. fingers' width of space, and he fixes another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then thread it like you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you have mastery of the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be the moderate needles, between subtle and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the subtle needles take hold of all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Because it is necessary for them to be moistened;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not puncture and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then prick the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and you hold tight or wrap the heads of the needles so they can stay steady
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn up;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it takes only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second cautery is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of skin together on a needle or where it has a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these heads all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each vertebra, the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this vertebra belongs to the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I treated a wound that a man had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was caused by a blow from a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was a wound more than a palm large,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was a gut well inches two palms large,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was a wound within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I replaced the intestine then, so that it had been without food for twenty-four hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal from the ointment, for I stayed in a place where one could not find any, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put cotton on the wound many times a day, and washed it with warm honey water until it was healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of cauterization:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and insert it into the defective part just up to the area within;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart in the right way, if you have drawn out the blood or cauterized or wherever you inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make a piercing of another part of the defective area within;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this treatment is that you burn them thus as the pelleteer makes the pelz,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave once the syfac of one part, and take again from another, until the treatment is fully accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of treatment, which Galen says is proper,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	it is thus that some make, who naturally assemble the injured parts together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the heads so that it faces another head, in such manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	fix a needle or head where the mirror-like surface, and make pierce that limb only slightly,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the heads thus face;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the part of the flesh just up to that spot within,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the head of the swollen vein;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make a piercing on one and the other side of the weak part just up to there within, in the other head of the swollen vein that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says this in his book, and no one testifies to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or it has thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is the stitching more grievous than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the arsenic has not moved,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the irritating powder, making a scar.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the arsenic has not moved, then apply no ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and they cut the vein, and sew up the skin, and the mirror;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound like the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, a lot of cotton;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and change it every day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not have mastery of another medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it between the tendons, and beneath the bones;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or numbness in the belly, and it often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they treat with black wine clusters, and meanwhile the numbness reaches up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces inward, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it's because of the plaintiveness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approaching of its natural disposition towards the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the serum flows from the wound, set it back as soon as possible, just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has turned towards black or green, then you must leave the black place, which removes blood that does not come from a vein.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then apply this to what is between the groin
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the joints in place during the procedure below the wound until it is far enough to alleviate the extraction when the nerves shout, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of a broken bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one cannot restore it in some homes,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by the point of a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus obstructed the excretion and ventilation;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I examine a patient according to what I can see, and do not cease from subtly probing until he is healthy, and his eyes settle.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him settled, I doubted that the patient had a bad pain in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	apply gentle heat to large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the gentle heat has opened the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it draws back its mouth thus;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he covers the head, and it holds itself so that it cannot dislocate,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then set another fringe afterwards in that manner as before, so that the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head becomes stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestine thread that is very loose,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then bind it to the head of this subtle twisted linen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in its natural position;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of treatment of wounds is not better than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal tubes, if there is no ingenious remedy, better that subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and likewise when she is combed and made to bend.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of a hard and white abscess, where one does not feel pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is thus combed like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear and open wounds, and other times in dense ones;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes a little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not except by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, through the small passage of blood or course;
ou por sa malice;	for his evil.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	for that which has hard flesh within, and on the lips, that does not let anything grow there.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much swelling.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the flesh is porous, and the matter is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because for that reason the corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where by its property in the region it slows down digestion, and delays health, and is harmful by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is suitable that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is a fistula that does not obstruct just up to the place that I have said, and you are confident of the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you examine it carefully, if you take a straight rod of iron or wood, the fistula is straight, if it wants;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, it seeks a subtle probe of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the probes bend within towards the twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and you should make a fistula at the perforated hand and you cannot search very well by feeling.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse through one of the perforations,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it purifies;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should examine carefully at your power, whether you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is separated in the font;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, if the coping is according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the rotten flesh and corrupt humors that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is properly deep in the right place, it is necessary that you cut open deeply, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I often put warm compresses in medicinal treatment, and the stitches just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the surplus which is accumulated at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then you put ointments on the wounds so they heal quickly;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it does not heal by this, then cauterize as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut around it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not grieve you in principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, then let it be so long that the decay is completely removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the things in the joints as much as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and render void what was before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not misled just as they found:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you discover and seek as long as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot overcome it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if it has a small corrupt bone, and you can treat it with bandages,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is made with a suitable instrument for that,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if it has many bones, so extract them all, do not leave a single one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if you make the moisture contrary, there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you correct the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot dislodge them for an hour, then put on the wound a poultice which induces ripening,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the abscess is ripe among the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then if they have more lightly the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you remove so much of the corrupted flesh that the blackness is entirely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corpse corrupt, it reaches just below the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if they want to sew and cover up to the corrupted area, and then heal as much as it is sewn;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you take an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man of around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came inside the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and did not have any cause of fever by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctor, in their foolishness, operated so much that the abscesses opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and corroded many materials, and became fistula, and there came many passages that all went bad and moist in the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many a mirror mirrored cure within 10 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which corrodes through the openings to a great body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young boy became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pierced a tent in one of these pores, and then searched for all the pores,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some veins came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and cut into one of the pores as much as I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	Here is the translation:
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and begin to restore the wound with medicines soothing by long tension, and cannot suppurate;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then began again, and discovered the bone as it was before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then stopped it, and thought to suppurate the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do so much that I scooped out a piece of the bone, and extracted it from all its marrow;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then the restoration of medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved hastily.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it does not fail to restart the work because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot suffer.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For often the evacuation of blood was successful, but he was entirely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and was born on the shoulder blade a hard callus, and was of good disposition and had no hindrance nor contradiction in everything, neither to the wing nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take the ligament, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct him to extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another bandage on the bigger one first, and bind it to the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stop the bleeding, if you extract the corrupt flesh from beneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a probe or a table beneath the bone to scrape out the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to cauterize as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and cauterize again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if it reveals the flesh entirely; then put the cauterizing iron underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then cauterize from one part to another the corruption, and be the healer who draws out the root of the corruption thus, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if there is corruption in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or whatever contains the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if there is corruption in the continuation of the joints, then there is no other anguish except to cut through;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if there is corruption in the prickling of the hand, or prickling of the foot, then it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but however it is necessary that you inquire into that corruption, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and you must treat it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not work against you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and the sockets to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the holes,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with its instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that you will show the instrument with which you will operate, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument with which you will operate, according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The heads perish either because of denseness or because of fever;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicated that corroding wound by the treatment of medicines, and it does not improve;
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you should cauterize that member up to the place where the corrosion comes from;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes by means of death, or through malice, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are such that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it goes on to corrode the limbs one after another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold of the entire body; if you hasten to copper,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and viper and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corrosion is at the head of the finger, thus the cupping, and do not give it too much space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, thus cupping at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, thus cupping at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it does not matter about the remedies that are applied, except for the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so we do it when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it seizes after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, it seizes the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then it seizes at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of coping with or supporting the limb is such that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch out one ministering to one of the ligaments below, and another ministering to the other ligament above,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cover or support, and place a layer of linen on each part, so that the supporting does not touch the healthy flesh,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient another wound and abscess caused.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood flows out when you operate, immediately cauterize the wound hastily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you apply some retaining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then tie the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I would counter that he had a wound on his foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a black spot which seemed to be burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first in his toe on the foot, so much that it consumed the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterward he returns to the corrosion or ulcers of the hand, and it comes to me
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put him on receptive things after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroding;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I treated the hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to counteract the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the strength of the man was feeble; and he despairs all, and returns to his earth,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he stops using his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not seen it happen except when one does another task, as one has need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never comes an abscess to the clear skin, and delays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they go and pierce, and in jumping the belly, and remaining with the vain views, just as one examines.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin which is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets of a drape.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not run just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such illness is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so prolonged that it reaches almost to the bone in the forehead, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so that you should cut around the entire circumference, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not be afraid of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the cyst thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look at the breasts are large, and the tumor which is in them is of foul odor,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then the medicated suppository of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take sage, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in it, and boil it in a vessel over fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	as long as the medicine is red, and thickens also as much as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it into water and into honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cleanse the womb, and hold back the passages;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then stir it in a sprinkling way;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the chest is exhausted, and the pus is evacuated.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of wood from the vine, and throw water on top.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then cool it, and cleanse it, until you know that the chest is well purified.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither does Egyptian medicine help with ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if they treat him with a mixture of water and honey or he has a little bit of litharge broth;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	where you treat him with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the senses are well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the cleansing of what makes the flesh grow in them,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cleanse with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it with a file a little, and put in a thin tent of Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or ointment of balsam, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut and let it heal so much that the lancet can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if they pierce where the swelling is above, whether it collects or settles below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the swelling is in depth, do not let it suppurate there;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cut beneath the seat thus as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if it appears in such a manner that the swelling runs to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the belly is perforated, if he does not let it swell up there
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat of the sinew below as you have seen,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	if it appears in such a manner: that the belly runs lightly downwards, and does not leave anything of the belly;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to put on the seat,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stand on the same drapery of linen that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then sew the edges in the proper place of the hole in the breast, which is a little larger than at first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then there is a gentle sewing under the other drapery according to the quantity of the hole,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the hole in the breast to align the suture, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the pierced breast, often removes the swelling.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows that which runs from the swelling, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed of the patients who feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the pierced breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the senses are affected already, and approach the saints;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open up the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change to another dressing, and renew the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses throw out undigested food after many days, know that the senses are not affected yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if you come subtle cors after long tension, do not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the saints are approaching. For there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel is indigestible, it knows how to relieve itself after many days, it seems that the senses are not troubled;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the senses take long to clear, and are polluted, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	Here is the translation:
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a remedy made of ivory, and make it with rose oil, and the essence of old wine in equal proportion.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then boil it down and use it; and this same mixture makes cooked honey thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when ivory remedies are not available,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then he applies a poultice, and spreads it over the breast, and sometimes he administers a long aristology.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is also as efficacious as powder of virtues and hundred herbs;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in using simples or composites: crush them, and make powder, and mix with the honey that I mentioned, and use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is enlarged, and is not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you know that corruption is deep-seated, and it makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the sinews;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail, near the joint of the hand.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	where they put their foot, or by chance not born with other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is weakened, and one does not take care of it, if an abscess comes to the foot;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and throw so much that they run against the root of the nail, and by chance they run entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that they bring putrid pain, and the skin is loose and wide, and the color is dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not profit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	so it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous tissue that remains around the finger,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great aids if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and he places his finger on the flesh, and begins to prick, and the blister.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it is necessary that you put the straight edge beneath the finger that pricks the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the swelling above, and cut into the subtle and light flesh,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply to the remaining flesh of the medicine, burning and corrosive remedies to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds until they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut around it, and remove the decayed part, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the decayed bone, cut around it in the same way as it was said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is injured, and bruised, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the corner of the spatula-shaped instrument, cutting across above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the incision does not reach just to the flesh which is beneath the corner, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain which comes from under the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born on the hands of certain men by chance are completely withered,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is a piece where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no one of the two fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who is born with an evil eye does not move himself,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and he who is born at the joint of the evil eye, perhaps moves by chance;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of him who is bruised is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size it by its root of a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Here is the translation:
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or ought to have a new derrière, it is necessary that you first cope with the round flesh up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cope with the bone at a convenient joint for that, then heal it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden movements that come together suddenly arise from birth, or from sudden injury, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cope with this dislocation, so that the bone returns to its natural form.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two subtle pieces of lead, so that the joints are joined, as it is suitable.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick together with one of these two with the palm, if you bind that joint as it is suitable.
Des vils	Of veins
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	You are full of thick, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities that come into several members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they also occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, more than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary therefore that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that they take it, and then they draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another manner is that you raise the vein, and pull it entirely out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision should be made in this manner: raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the thick vein is made subtle.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg of the patient down from the hip to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then remove and draw the black blood from your hand, from one vein to the other, until as much blood as the virtuous blood of the patient can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then lay it down, and command that he should abstain from eating black bitter foods;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommend the evacuation and the healing when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of the limb are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then put him in a bath, and let the swollen leg relax warmly until it turns red, and inflates the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the knee joint, or in the part below the thigh;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of this part, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin, it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then apply the razor below, so it is lifted from the skin, and then it is held at the nape of the neck more lightly,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cut in another way thus two inches deep; then strip the skin from the vein so it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then shave with the razor, as you have done, and hold it at another uncle, as you have done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut to another size, or more if you are a master of it, then shave, and cut at the toe of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then burn with fire to the second notch; then strip the belt from the belt, until it is entirely free, then the covering.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot burn and lift, if you thrust a strong double thread needle everywhere.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and burn and pull, and thrust underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is freed;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and take care that it does not cover, for if it covers, you cannot burn or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have fully treated it, put a warm compress on the wounded area with wine and oil of roses; and care for it until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so as not to cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it was subtle, it would seize the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is engendered in legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance grows another part than in legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it goes beneath the body of snakes and worms, interjecting between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are if it comes into the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then it changes the places, and the veins begin to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop with a piece of cloth around one and a half inches up to the node.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the splint stay on the leg, and all the times it is not in default, if the envolope wraps around the splint, and the swelling;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely issued;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction or wound, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because that is why it is necessary to treat it little by little just up to the head, and leave nothing or corpses;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is often this vein when it is treated with 5 punctures of a long needle, or of 10.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one vein comes to me, from which it issues 10 punctures of a long needle, and when you cut, if you find a broken or perforated place, and pierce just to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	if all of it issues; and let the material that is within be evacuated, and apply to the wound medicines that are penetrating without any purification for a day, then cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And often at this vein many roots, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and many come from wounds, and where it jumps into the rain; cure the wound thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has oxen,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and they feel well along the alignment of limb to limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and then it bursts forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is engendered by putridity of certain humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and lice and roundworms or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force more than when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	it is necessary then that you bind the limb above and below with a strong, well-tightened bandage,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the trailing flesh, and if the vein is deeply implanted in the flesh, you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cut above, and pull forward;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient's modification of bodily mixture with dissolving medicines for the bad humidors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of rotten flesh causing putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain which comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then it moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, his eyes climb up as if to a shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more stiff than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then soon after it spreads throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then I count that she twisted again within the body, as if I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason, it seemed that the constrained winds appeared;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I did not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you wanted to cure this disease, and the patients felt that pain, it appeared as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	Here is the translation:
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and apply cautery to the joint; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those who are troubled by winds, like foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's venom, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the joints of the body where they settle.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that they have large points, and small ones, and curly, and swollen;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have jagged edges, and those that have lengths, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which falls into no member if it falls according to various ways: either in a principal member it curves,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then into no place of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and swells the swelling that is on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	Here is the translation:
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it happens without strength of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps from the white moist wound appearing as pus, and jumps out also like broken flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is a sign that appears, if you keep to the cure, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls or pierces the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not at all void;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the sweat changes also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and sweating cold, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	he then feels without doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves a healthy arm are that without flatulence, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and shudders with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and casts great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the loins.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the sausage or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the food.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the sausage or belly, and there is no point of wind in the intestine, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the sausage.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the sausage or belly is in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the arm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar members, are safe according to several more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, thus I will tell you that it happened to me, because I did something similar.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man who had an arrow or a lance in the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and it was done without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I drew out an arrow that had pierced into the fat of the eye beneath the eyelid,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrowhead was removed, and he could not touch it except for the tip towards the thigh.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with a very light iron shaft without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And it pierced a throat of a Christian with an arrow, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I softened the barbarians, and I subtly worked on them until I pierced them, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And they pierced a vein at a man's hip, where it was swollen or bruised, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed xxx days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the vein, and I made an incision, and pierced it deeply, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose vein has fallen or dropped, and the wound was sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and he keeps the arrowheads within, and does not at all change their natural arrangements,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he endured there a great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And it happened to a arrow to a certain prince, king, who had it implanted in his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the cure after it had been implanted for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt aching and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I applied to the affected place a plaster made with attractant and digestive ingredients, because the abscess did not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the abscess of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put in the hot iron more often, and reset the wound immediately, and thus I kept the patient long tense.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrowhead. Immediately then his nose; and it was pointed at me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a medicinal corrosive ointment more often, until it was uncovered,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had lodged in the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted at the opening of the wound by that medicine aloe, so that the head of the arrow appears visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it crossed well the terms within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I slackened if the wound where I applied the tourniquets, and one side and the other, and could not issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously use remedies of various kinds, until I took it in hand with well-made tourniquets;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to this sign that its form will come at the end of this chapter, as much as I understand it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restore it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you put your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything in.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those who are present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed unless according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	where they enter through the skin, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth there where it enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and jumps forth many times now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, let it be until the flesh is purified around it, and the discharge is eased;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot be discharged, let it be thus for some days, and the swelling will decrease each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, so perforate everywhere with a subtle forearm, as much as the eyes within are enlarged, and then the treatment.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: if they do not treat them, but let them be until they are even after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes just to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not fixed firmly because it slipped out of the bone, and does not come up to the surface,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains for some days without bad accidents, if the engine is well treated.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very firmly fixed and cannot come out, then administer tareres around it, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is replaced in the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, then one should make a complete tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if you pull with an unsuitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or vein, if you think that the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow head or point to which it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you remove the skin which is stuck with ulcers so that you can cure,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or fold back the ears of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly take care not to break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at one time, leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if you remove blood that does the opposite, so amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard against incision of the nerve and the vein, and put in a device so you can safely draw out the arrow without danger;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether it is straight or crooked, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form they were in when the arrow fell on them;
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you;
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears as nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in this place if one sees or feels it apparently.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut then thus, so that the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is the fault of the arrow, it is, one cuts all the way around it;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the fault is in the chest, and you see how to administer a remedy, if it administers an instrument that cuts;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then one cuts strongly;
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is cut, it is cut with an instrument pointed inward, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the vein is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it converges.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the vein is in the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the side, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, so you cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract, and then sew up the wound, so that it heals.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and you see the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the pointed instrument is also like a bird's feather.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	For cauterizing at the tip of the arrow, thus it is the method:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for cauterizing and for extracting if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has or chief 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: certain glands that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the certain arteries that are in the certain temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the certain veins that are in the certain eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the small gutters which are on the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the small veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the small veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic, and it is called the left side of the head, and people commonly call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the vein is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people commonly call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side;
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people commonly call it the "vein of the belly", and it is located on the pubic area;
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one that we bleed, which appears clearly on the skin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saving vein is the vein that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the skin on the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second sophenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nessa" which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg are 3 veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catharrhes, and with migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are rough like a dry cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a vis.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the veins appearing behind the ears in the veins dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the humps give you pain, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an infection;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then raise your hand above the entire vein above,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you must traverse two ducts, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold him steady, until he is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an old one,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and the vein, and accustomed optalmia, and at the course of the watery eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the healer is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then make a sign of incision;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then raise the heart above the vein at the tip of your index finger, and insert the lancet beneath;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and raise the vein high, and the scalpel, just as you have done in other veins, and make a correction of blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then disengage the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their coping and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic [head] as maladies of the ancient face, and migraine, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and it is of such a quality that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again moves out of place with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Here is the translation:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the healthy part of the traversal be a little thick, a little long, a little wide flame, for there is no point of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The health of the vein of the hand is worth avoiding ague, and excessive sweating, and facial diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the wound is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to his left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle flame long, and fix it in the lever in the space that is between the two nostrils;
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well here, and the blood will start to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too much in depth, and make a correction of blood according to your necessity, then leave it a night, for it is almost completely restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that's the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sanitation of the .ij. joints helps in the stretching of the wing, and at the beginning of messeliness, and in many diseases, and in epilepsy, and in corroding, and in herpes, and in swelling;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the sanitation is that the patients stretch their neck one way and another, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then feel the vein of the loin a little broadly, then draw blood from it moderately, or as much as is needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do another part in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the veins moderately together.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and let him sit until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins of the livers above, if they aid in gathering in the mouth, and in corruption of gums, and cracks of the liver, and pain of the nose and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the liver, and examine its veins, of which one is on the right liver and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they recognize them by their blackness, and by their having small black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you examine the largest of each part, and thus make the veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the veins is such that if the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a dark vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine one and then the other, and do not press too hard, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly examined are healthy in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where you prick everywhere it makes a wide flame, or subtle olive oil if you cut trenches, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the wide flame is very renowned, and is wide if you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it has mastery over opening the veins that are full of thick apparent blood, and that contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flame olive-burning:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it's more subtly pointed, and is for cleansing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the healer to cleanse wisely, and that he should beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not pinch the flame, but cut it off as if anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the abscess does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no vein of it, or you bleed into the vein in his arm: it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and take a flame-shaped iron, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to recognize the joint of the injury, it is necessary that you stretch the arm, so that you touch the joint as much as you recognize the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the joint of the wound, and then stretch the arm, and take a flame-shaped iron;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the joint inflamed, for it is of the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swelling above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Make haste then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then lift your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be without fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then open the artery so that the head of the veins returns; and let the blood flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fist-sized bandage, and bind it, and take one of the moieties and place it well just next to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the wound is stable, that's good; if not, then cauterize, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staunching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the ease of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healthiness of the vein in a thousand ways helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too much in the front, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the sinews become inflamed, and by chance he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not expose itself in any way due to its subtlety, then you must wound the instrument aneasil; and avoid the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the muscles, then it makes two long tubes.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The sanity of the cephalic helps, because it attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bloodlet on the olivary vein or on the martyr vein, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and not to hurt anything if one fails the first time, and then recommences.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when it fails at first, but it does not irritate.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not diminished unless it is guarded by sanity.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the vein operation be done on one of the three veins that are at the elbow: namely, the cephalic, fat, and basile vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should operate at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should operate on the first day or the third, after 9 hours or 10 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The vein operation that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time determined, but only according to the need of day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor do they advise cautery for the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary to purge the intestines with a light clusters.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much retained filth, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and noxious humors from the intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not heal quickly who is too full of meats, nor one who is drunk, as long as they are furious, nor dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it worsens on the sick one after passionate colic, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiplying of the habit in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and this is all the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of sweet body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtle are the humors, if the blood is thick, through meats and through beverages and through medicines, if you have the pure power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, since nothing can deflect it, to make the blood more subtle;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you prick of the vein beneath the third finger, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you beware that day of work, and of puncture, and of dislocation, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be gentle and joyful, and let the veins be higher than those that are pricked, and rub the arm three or four times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then he rubs the shoulder with his hands until the veins swell, and he feels it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then anoint the sinewy part with a little old oil, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein below the shoulder where it hurts, to anoint;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not fade and fails to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that fade like cords in the sinewy part, and if they have such ones that are full of windiness,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if one inserts onto the flame, one withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or near the fastening, so the vein is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vein is inflamed, and the patient expects it, let him wait a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps it will come to abscesses wounds; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases them;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then insert the needle into the entire flame directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and open it a little hastily, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the health, and put a little of the oil of lily on it, for it alleviates the body of blood's pain, and is mixed in this oil which the lily produces;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same makes a triangular and bulging wound, when one puts it on the limb; if the sinew is subtle and separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, similarly when it is not healthy unless at the time when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten, and put on the limb a sponge moistened with water and a little warm, and hold it in place for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days without any black or green discharge, then it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft flesh yielding to the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in short time without any artery; but the master surgeon does it by applying a dry plaster to strengthen the flesh, then treating with another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it be subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled across, not in a puncture.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of health is saved from deterioration of blood and of decay of nerve, and is worth more than the health which has a long duration but not a broad one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a mild purge with juice of green apples; if it is heated, then draw out three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of a cold complexion, then diminish beforehand the mild purge with syrup of muscat, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cherries, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it fails in health, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use of other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to evacuate his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is afflicted by great pain, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to evacuate his arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, then bleed on the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to be bled from another place, then he should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and to widen the opening as far as it reaches the pam.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you observe all the signs of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it beats, so that death does not come into the body.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you do not know how to release the arm, and make blood flow out a second time, and the opening is closed, so that you press firmly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is curved, let him stretch his arm hastily, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him go as long as he feels it the second time; or you touch at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it on the small piece of silk, and press on it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let him leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed twice, then the blood flows from that same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the vicinity of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healthy one is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so long as the fissure becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy one now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the wound be large, and let it be well pressed near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not reset the hand in warm water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger on the right hand is good against all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Here is the translation:
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cross the vein, and if you cut through everything entirely, do not cause any grief;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too deeply in front, because the nerves are then stripped of skin;
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot be opened.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out enough blood as it seems necessary to you, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus make a scar of each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The wisdom of the wise man is good for all the diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as with diseases of the chest, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his wisdom is that the patient's pain is relieved by a warm bath, and rubbed on the vein until it perspires.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go towards the kidneys;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal the wound on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and heal the traversing wound as in a copulant; and let the flames be anesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the saneness cannot issue forth, put the foot in water, and let it be well purged of the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing fails the first time, restart the second above a little, because the limb is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus make the wisdom of one foot equal to the other.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the level of the thigh, and its health is related to the pain in the leg, when it's because of hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its health is that patients are between bad and good, and stretch above the thigh, three fingers in twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein does not appear; and if it appears, then the health is in all ways that you can, and by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is good that you take it, for the vein is healthy, and it is very well received in many houses.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, look for any vein that opens or closes between the two feet, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make the blood flow as you wish, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The healthiness of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is done with horns, or with iron, or with glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation which is without touching is according to two methods: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation which is done by touching and by extraction of blood is done in 13 ways, two parts of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	one of which is entirely in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the ventous below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping on the shoulders; and the cupping on the back;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the cuppings in the arms; and the cuppings of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cuppings of the ribs; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this, one should not be afraid to take blood, as one does when bleeding a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not fitting that it be administered, nor at all by fire nor sense of fire, in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is voided.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to administer, or by habit, if we begin each hour at the start of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each season;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they have had the task of administering, have heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who find excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who spit a mouthful of blood, and have swollen the tongue, and redden their lips;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who bleed, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and similarly when it is in the midst of the month, we command to take a remedy after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saliva of the muzzle helps with the grip of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation is in the place of the sainy of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not suit anyone who is of a cold complexion in usage, or who has a catarrh, because this causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason it does not suit the elderly in usage, nor those who have cold heads or illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often sick, if they become obstructed, and for this reason it is suitable to put the ventose a little lower down due to the doubt of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Here is the translation:
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to a fracture of the collar bone above the arm, and to an injury, and to fullness;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to puncture, because it holds too firmly, if there is inflammation of the spleen or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventosations are like this: the ribs of the neck if they cause pains of the head, and obstructions, and migraines, and to the strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the vein of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to place his hand so he does not cut the artery, and does not see the remaining blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The cauterizations of the mouth if they are worth a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the healthy state of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The cauterizations of the spinal column are worth a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The cauterizations of the sides are worth as much as those of the .iij. veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the surgeon to not make too many incisions, for the veins are naked and exposed, and he knows about the underlying nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the back is as if it were a remedy from the foundation, and for the underlying diseases, and it is necessary that the cup be large, and be of copper, so it has the power to draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings on the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from the entire body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. sophisms, and of .ij. swellings, and always they clear the body after long use, and bring about a better disposition in many ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck immediately, and put it hastily, and remove it equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the red and swollen place, and draw out the blood's flow; then strike, and reapply the cuppings, and take care of the body's disposition, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once strongly, and make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize two or three times: the first time to subtly clear the path of the large wound.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood bit by bit, we suffice with only one application.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we recommend doing it frequently; and if the wound is deep, we cauterize deeply, and the goal is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you open the veins of oily apertives and dissolvents:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if it is one who has tender skin and large pores, it is not suitable to put oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he raises with the help of angelica, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have gross superfluities are raised by old wine, or water of elder, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to be more healthy with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventilation.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary to warn when one must be ventilated and when it is ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of the person who is healthy being choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that they take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and peppery dishes, and roasted meat of a pig, and damp meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little peas and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when they will be purged, they should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is suitable to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before the purging, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The blisters that are placed without striking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, because these members cannot suffer blows on their surfaces.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not make them on the strength that they attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place blisters on the belly and on the bowels to diminish the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue through adventure the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it happens when one places it upon the fire and upon the soft part when there is retained ventilation,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these ventoses are administered emptied by suction so gently; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in bad diseases of the lungs, and in such a manner that one fills the ventose with warm water or hot water in which one has cooked herbs of convenable virtue to them.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the ventose administered by fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should have two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth of forefront, and it should be placed beside the millet, a small opening, just as if to push an awl.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and let there be in the millet a transverse rod of iron or steel, to put a grasping clamp,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then apply this cup to the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or oil, and put it in the cupping glass across the vein that is in the cupping glass,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the brightness is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the part that we have spoken of, so that when one wants to, if the vapors go, and remove the bandage;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the dressing as before, and rewrap it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the bandage then, which is administered in malady of pleurisy, to all aching, it has no strength nor part, and is not administered unless when it is full of ache, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible;
et c’est li forme:	and that is the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Here is the translation:
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the wounds of flesh, as we do with ulcers or abscesses, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the ulcer is such that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without putrefaction, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a bandage on a tender sweet spot, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be free from vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the wounds;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are swollen, and red, it is the time to apply a poultice, if it is the case or one can put a ventouse, one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the limb of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limbs are too numb afterwards along the course of the veins, so anoint with a cloth of linen in cold water, and put on, as long as the vein is constricted;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the veins are multiple, then put on a Vitriol ointment, or gall, and similar things, as long as it is constricted;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you apply on the body many peeled and softened beans, and let them stay until they adhere to the skin, it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this mastery, take other similar ones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the blood vessels do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle until the blood issues from it.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then apply them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling, sprinkle some powder of aloe and of dried brookweed, or of ash, if they will now cling.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, that they did not find anything of the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I never found any good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I knew nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I studied so much that I treated the science, and through experiment, and through the experience of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of instruments that are needed, as I did in these preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing will be lacking in total, just as weakness of body, or old age, or feebleness.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the tendons are not very strong, or too cold; and moderate cold joints, it is to know frozen joints, and flesh of oisel and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat rough fish, and do not fill oneself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, so you do not have doubt of a hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if you govern the patient according to their primary condition as they are accustomed.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as a fermenting fruit in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and more quickly repairs the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the weakness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but it is not a cure, to reset the broken bone, that is, thick tendons which are hurt and join the limb together, so it enforces as it was before; and does not hinder any part of its function, and therefore it needs to be nourished with heavy foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Here is the translation:
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if you break with a wound, and break at all a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes back to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known the break of the bone because the joint is twisted, and appears well by feeling, and sounds when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have tortuousness, or fissure, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not seem that you move to the hand, but put on medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage which goes into the joint, and are the disjointed parts, it is necessary now to put them in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not grow there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses grow there, let it be for a day, until the abscess is appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then set it equal in the muscles where you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then hold steady, as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is in two parts, or hand, or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two cords, or to a cord and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, you reset them by all means using additions in their places in the muscles where you can, and take care that through your work no harm or injury comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to their work of abscessed and contracted member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at rest, scold the patient well that he should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so positioned that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you must ensure it is set straight, so that twisting does not occur when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, like arms and fingers and similar ones: so it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wrapping;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for wide bandages encircle the entire large limb, and hold everything equally on all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then put light entwining bandages, 3 or 4 tours, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little at all of the bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is slightly adjusted;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn it around again above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and hold moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the swollen ligaments of the loins or hips, so they are all equal, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on top something that appeases the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch on your stitches, and be of a moderate size cane rod, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm branches, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the stitch that one puts on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it suits the limb of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold steady on the stiles as you did at the first ligature, then tie above a vein similarly, just as in the first ligature on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the tighter it is, the less; and it is necessary that the vein be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a gentle touch;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the veins are large, just as I have seen foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords of uneven thickness, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not suit that there should be less than two fingers' breadth between each stile.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the staples after the tightening in their healthy places, put beneath them a dressing of linen or a piece of leather, so that it does not become black.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruising, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not suitable to tighten these staples on the bruised members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not suitable to put these staples on before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs suddenly.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and thus the manner of ancient remedies to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of remedy restoring fracture in many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of remedy restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, in proportion .x. 3; mirre and aloe, in proportion .v. 3; and alechil .viiij. 3; and make into powder, and mix with abundant egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, use this remedy, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is suitable for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of remedy that is suitable for torsion: take myrrh and vismalve, in proportion .x. 3; mirre and aloe, in proportion .viiij. 3.; acacia .vi. 3.; Armenian bol .x. 3., and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to plaster joints and bones dislocated from their place, and ease the sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the fracture: take a new linen cloth, and apply it gently with oil and in warm water, and put it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore completely, but it is good for soothing an abscessed wound, and properly relieving pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthworm soil leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take roots of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, and a part of each; crush them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, a part of each; crush them, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Here is the translation:
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply Galen's remedy to the broken limb, to restore it, by using warm dry things, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat a wound and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men who have been beheaded, or wings of birds, and visnaga, and equalize them, and crush them, and make an ointment and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is his bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it, it will take many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the wound, or becomes inflamed, without rest or swelling, if you hasten, and loosen it, and remove the ointment now; and take a lighter dressing, and a moist sea-sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the wound, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress with rose oil or water, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplastering, and do not restrain it so strongly as before; and subtly treat until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled and reduced and pain and swelling have gone away from everything, and you have mastery of emplastering and bandaging, then resume it, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not leave it loose for fewer than 8 or 10 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the breakage is corrected, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Here is the translation:
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Here is the translation:
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Here is the translation:
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are fractures made by percussion of a sword, and the whole bone breaks just above the socket which is beneath the bone, as if it were crushed or shattered; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts the bone from above, senselessly piercing, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussive blow, or a split or a break in the stone, or a fall onto the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is implanted in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small split, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by falling onto a stone, or by a blow, or by similar things, and it makes the piece of bone enter downwards, and it is like the joints are set when they fall onto the hot coals; as it happens within the bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And it happens more to those who have a moist head of bone, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged, like those; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaking through the pulling away from them, and the inquiry into their tension, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary similarity is known through this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs upon it, then it shows the black breaking.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, beware of the accidents of the patient, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of the column, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paralysis, and fever with ague, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the naval fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue beneath the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the injured bone, and uncover it on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more subtle than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, it is helped by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And make the wound rest until the abscess bursts are appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut into the bone with an osteotome, and it is done according to .ij. ways of working: one way is that you cut at the narrow taillement beforehand, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I cut .i. another larger taillement than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many diverse instruments, some straight and others broad, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you adjust instruments with supports, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the outer layer, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each one comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have supports for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of supports:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the bone is that you put an instrument on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then replace the instrument a little further away, and do this all around, and cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you hold, such as pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted it, it is necessary that you use an aperteur which is delayed from the bone to another instrument similar to a incisor, but it needs to be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no useless shells, if they lightly touch the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is what Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this incisory instrument, of which this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut on one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the web that is beneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is airy at the opening, then the bone is lightly set, for one sets the bone well without harming, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce just to the membrane, and the bone is so slightly covered above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape off the scales with a subtle rasp, which you should have in various quantities, to adjust each location most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp before with large rasps, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate hair-like breaks and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you adjust the cause according to its direction; and this is a thing that is not easily understood by one who has not devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a bandage of linen, according to the size of the wound, and apply oil rose, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and apply wine and oil rose, and place it on the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another thread, and do not constrict it further until it holds the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it thus for a day or two, until the heat of the abscess is appeased, then disperse it, and administer medicines such as radix of lily, and powder of violets, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and administer thus medicines without sharpness or biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and beware that the wound is thus clean, that you do not leave the infection, nor leave it to assemble pus, for when pus assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and decays, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one places on the wound something biting, it becomes inflamed from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if you do not have fire that comes from the medicine that one has placed there, which has such a virtue, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil, and glue a drapnel, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then you heal in many ways of cures that are necessary, until he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no times are the two parts of the nail broken above, or one part by the sole, because they are two bones; and this beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a wound or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your small finger or fingerless nail into the broken part, and set the break equally according to the natural shape of your finger, and in the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural figure.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come out at the joint, then it is necessary that you set it evenly on top of a slightly large radius.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, then refashion another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed wound is pacified, then it will close at the top of the nail, tending to form a crust of linen threads, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply cautery to another part, the break is there; and let the tents be as large as they fill the pores of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And direct any restorer that one should soften the tents in broth, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites, and powdered millet; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes apply on where you have eyes of eagle in place of tents, and if it has a soft drapery within, and holds the breakage, and soothes the patient from within; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are observing, if you put cerotate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of dragon's blood.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if apostemes (abscesses) occur, apply an emplaster made of flour of six herbs and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top, and do not bind them too tightly;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the nail is small, and it breaks into minute pieces, remove the extraneous parts with suitable instruments, then sew up the crack, and treat the injuries with charms, and suddenly, as with suitable emplasters and ointments;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no deep wound in the nail, treat it with tents, and apply a poultice of pounded plants, so that it may be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury above, and the break is dislocated thus slightly, and it is not broken in two, because it is held together by the corbel inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and put the break inside lightly, and hold it with the other hand above, and set it evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated upwards, it is necessary that you administer extension of the jaw thus, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth are disturbed, or broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jaw a cerote, and put on it a double drapery; and put on the drapery a well-made staple, or a piece of even leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then set it back in place because it is changing; and apply a poultice made of powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six grains, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are bitter, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, treat them according to what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, remove the useless piece of bone that is in the way; if you subtly remove the obstacle with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to the need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the fracture is without wound, that you have two ministers, if one holds the shoulder that feels the strength broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put equal the fracture to your fingers, so that the form be as it should, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have mastery of extending, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or of wool, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you make equal the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot bring the head of the forceps to the surface, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient gaze upwards at his shoulder, and put under the shoulder a soft oreiller, and push the ministers down below, so that the bone of the forceps be raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel that it is broken in pieces, then it is necessary that you sew up; and pull out the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess flesh, then take one of the incision tools that you have; but put under the forceps this instrument, to guard against excessive flesh.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it seems a spoon, and it is not a gauge, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have .ij. fingers, as you see, and let one be large, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you soften with a drapnel in rose oil and in axle grease and in wine, and apply it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The strangulation of the bone, when it is without wounds and without bruising, is that you apply on the bone a plaster made of powdered millet and egg white, and apply light staples above, and place a splint beneath, if you are skilled in this;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then apply a double layer of drapnel above the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and set the steel on the bruise, and turn the bandage on the neck, and below the healthy spine, and below the affected spine; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, if it is rewarded every day, and when the ligaments relax, if it is restrained;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient sit on his back, and place it when he sleeps; a small pillow below the spine to lift the shoulder high; if you align the bruise with the force of the joint, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so that bad accidents do not happen, for twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and restrain it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored to its full extent in twenty-eight days, and with less trouble to anyone.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the bruise of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone projects forward, and not below the heart, if it is placed thus, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscessed heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is not often broken in the middle, but it happens little; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of health, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and that is not good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies thus on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplaustres and stoups above the subtle layer of salt, or another lighter dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it on the broken bone, so it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes loose, then hold it fast; and if it seems to dislocate, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the flesh, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and remove the dressing, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the dressing, and hold it firm until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the breaking of the ribs only happens because of great blows to the back, and at the inner chest, and they do not break unless they are brittle; and one feels it well by inquiring into the two [ribs].
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you make equal the break, as it is suitable. And then put on the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as if it were a pleurisy, because the bone points to the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits great abundance of blood, and it is of grievous health, and the old men have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they should administer foods that inflate the stomach, to soften the fracture by bloating.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, for abscesses would not come, if it had not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that one should not put ventouses on the limb, to suck out the ferment, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the superfluities from the limb by the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they direct that one should cover the limb of a wounded hand with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to set the straightness within, then let it be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain which they cannot bear through the opening that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break into the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to protect the syphac; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then stitch up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with emplausters, until they are healthy. And if aposteme wounds come, then put on dressed fabric soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb; and cure meanwhile the limb of those that need to be apostemed, and be gentle on the ribcage where it should be, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will be broken; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to no one, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, you do not feel anything. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they change and feel well when one holds them firmly and precisely, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so that one can put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care to see if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is involuntary evacuation and senseless ejection; and when one evacuates it from their belly, it ejects without their will. And when it is evacuated from their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain for their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly regarded.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of May dew, so that it be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone dislocates, then it is necessary to cover the wound with a bandage; and remove the bone, then assemble the edges of the wound, so that it is large, in one piece, then apply the treatment of anointing with charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the knee", you put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on the poultice, then put the plaster and the stave in place, so that you have mastery over it; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make a fomentation, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there will not be a little bit of easement at the head; and make a long splint, and decline to the sides, and comes to the patient's pain in the limb, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upon it, so that you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put equally on that fracture, so that it may be in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on his belly, so that the restoration of this fracture can be well-perceived.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and place the limb under the ribs, so that the binding is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come, do not touch them, so that the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those which are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, one must restore it according to one of the methods: one of which is that you take a full fist of moderate size, in this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the joints in this way, and hold them high, and sit the patient on a seat; then put his arm dislocated on the stick, until it reaches the joint, and has in the middle of the stick, then holds onto something heavy or the attendants hold it from below; then put the fingers on the break even with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one places the patient on his shoulder, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the attendants that one holds what is on the break with their hands, and the others hold below all the joints, and each extends to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold it back below the breakage, and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it must be placed below the joint, and another towards the side, below the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, then it must be placed lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even above the joint, and above the side; then set the breakage even, as it must be, and hold steady, so that apostemes do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if apostemes come, then do not hold back until seven days, and put on a soft linen bandage with oil of roses, until the apostemes are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the dressing, and hold steady on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so that nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the breakage a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be as large as it passes the breakage by two fingers on each part; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, stronger and less aloof.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the stars, and the straining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of the 14 days, lest the vein should not swell with life coming to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such accidents come to pass, do not unbind before 14 days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and place their hands on their stomach; and put the joint under a plain cushion of equal thickness, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you address by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first subtle; and when it begins to recover, may it be gross. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be recovered in 40 days or so; and then one must unbind and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb. And if the stricture is lazy and numb, let it stay bound for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Here is the translation:
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small veins are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings; and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they were broken and healed together. If it's the small vein that's broken simply, then you must extend lightly, and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the great fleshy part, it needs to be stretched more strongly; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient cross himself in the same way, and place the cushion before him higher, so the patient doesn't suffer any hardship; then stretch out the minister's arm at the part below his hand, or at the linen, and another minister above. And then he puts the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking into a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, apostemes appear, apply the dressing made of cerote oil and white wax, so it is not too hard nor too soft; and lay the dressing on subtly, until the inflamed apostemes are calmed. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of powdered mill dust with abundant egg white, then place the staples, and let the staple of the break be stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have twenty staples or arms in different positions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or in the other; and hold more strongly on the break than elsewhere, and touch less often, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is stretched from linen, be not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And rewound the limb and the linen afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as a bruise that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you warm the limb with lukewarm water, so that the bruise may be appeased; and let the limb not be tightly restrained. And then recommence the strapping, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones disjointed, and similar things, it will be addressed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take a ward that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold it steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not release him until 20 days or when it is better, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and jerkiness, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers, there are few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent swelling.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient's arm be crossed, and it stands directly in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministres the broken bones, and sets them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and he applies a plaster and poultices, so apostemes do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the partition within the belly of the plant, he makes a sphere of bandages, and instructs the patient to bind it to his broken plant; and then he tightens with a long bandage, and it is the splint of soft leather, as big as the plant of the hand, and he binds, if it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the fracture, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is covered and straight, then he ties everything around the hand, and tightens the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of our two bones, it is the pouches, he sets it even, as it is necessary; and he binds with the plant, and if you see that he puts a small straight splint to lift the break, and does not move; and if the break is in the other two, as in the index or one of the others, he sets it even, and binds with the healthy finger that follows; or he binds them all together, holding strongly, or he puts on a splint, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the aposteme wound, and heal what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is that one binds it above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient gazes at his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the hip, then one of the bands goes towards the thigh, and the other bands below the break. And also if it is near the knee, then the bands are placed beneath the knee, and then extended downwards; then put the mirrors to the bone equally with its two natural joints, and then apply the plaster, and place the bandage, so that abscesses do not form there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the treatment is done in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the fracture thus. Bend a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and place a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then put it on the fracture thus, and put a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten the binding, then start to bind strongly two or three turns on the fracture; and as you go higher up on the fracture, and loosen the binding less; then take .ij. heads of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and tie .iij. sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, so that you come below the foot; and the binding, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then it will not come to an abscess or an inflammation like this.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are pricking, then you must extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then one must break the bone, and make a furrow; and the treatment is done as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the thigh broken thus as one puts these sticks, just like in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration done thus, it does not hide the evils.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the blood flow is restored on that day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the gutter of the knee there is little breakage, but it often splits. And if it breaks, it's not just a fissure, or a perforation, and has all kinds of wounds, and without wounds, and this feels very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then put in the filling, and insert a round staple, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it requires, then reorder all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other breakages, such as hot abscesses and similar things; put in each accident what it requires, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, because one is called by right "non-muscle", and the other is called "foscile"; and every fracture comes as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely in all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one sees it well; and turn beneath. Then adjust the extension, and make it even, and lay the bones evenly; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and lay it in the middle, so that the leg does not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one will hinder the length of the leg, which is wooden, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break where there is a wound; and remove it every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and both ankles, and they do not have more than five positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that you break two bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on the joint where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at the plain joint, then hold the foot firmly in place, then envelop it with drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the toes broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that small table I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, put on each toe a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in linen drapels, and hold the small table under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the small table, so that it touches the belly of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, which we have discussed; and attend to each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the breaking of the bone one should prick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if she makes it swell, then incline to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with the cotton of the nature, and put a big stick in it; then lift the woman, and little by little lift the back, and then jumps the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stick; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or eight: it will restore the breakage, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a thread around the penis, and blow into the bladder strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the breakage; then fill with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of man is broken, or of woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hip; and these nearby breakages are not hidden from one who applies his study and use, and intends my book. For the breakage signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: intend to give.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the verge, when it is broken, take an eye of a bone and put it in the verge; then envelop it with a cloth around, and leave it eight days or nine, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set right now, so that the signs we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, apply the vitriol ointment, if you have no other thing, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the uncovered chest, it is necessary that you put it in place gently with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not apparent for putting in place with your hands, then take hold of this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary in the mirror that it takes hold of 3 or 4, according to whether it is necessary in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so it does not slip on the compression above the limb at your work, and let it be straight beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed above the apparent bone; and let it be bent once, so it recovers, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it is necessary that you grasp the head of the bone, so the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take hold of an instrument suitable for this, or incision or sewing, at your power; then reassemble what is remaining in the bone, with rough and minor stitches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure it is in its place, then apply a black sticky plaster, and properly cover it with this; and do not put anything on the wound that has oil, so it does not cause decay and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times foolish people have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on the patient; and may the constriction be gentler and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in place of these, hard bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, one day or two days, to improve the wound, remove what you had put on all wine, and apply ointment to heal wounds, as you would apply tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you elevate the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowels are carried downwards lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens often, and it cannot be repaired but rather the bowels return again, because there are small pieces of bone, for which reason it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come upon the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bindings, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to numerous abscesses; or due to too great movements, not at its proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and happiness; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the abscesses often dry up, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it regains its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member is twisted after the healthiness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the node is removed by continually and lengthy rubbing with moist hands. And let there be gentle movements made to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortured area is enveloped and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and put caution and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be re-set back in place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if it is delayed, the limbs swell, and by chance if it is reset to its place; for that reason it must not be moved at the hour when it is swollen: many times spasms and other pains come.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Always, when it happens, make the patient healthy, then let him be, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on the dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaw are in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its original position more easily.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this manner that the ministers touch the head of the patient, and put their fingers as if grasping one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other finger of the hand should be deft, to set straight; and instruct the patient that they soften their jaws, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers place it straight, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is difficult, especially if they are the two jaws together, with warm water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset straight, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, then place a warm cloth soaked in oil of rose and wax on it, afterwards binding it lightly with soft linens.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be steady between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor overexert himself in changing, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not strain to open his mouth while eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their place at one hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and excessive sweating come, and perhaps a solution of stomach pain, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a prediction; and many times he who has had it dies, within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the joint within the continuity of the bone and the flesh, and it is dislocated many times at the weakness, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is near the hip cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated many times, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus it is necessary to reset the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates at the top part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, because in those it happens quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it happens at the points, and returns to the points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men have a blow or fracture, and inflame the shoulder of a hot abscess, and think it is dislocated by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine them, so that you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the axle, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them diverse manifestations;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axle touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a foreign object; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the infants are sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister raises his hand from the patient above, then places his fingers underneath the joint, and raises the joint with force above to the place; and the minister raises his hand, and stretches it above, then puts it underneath; if it will come hastily.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should gently soften and soothe, as with a decoction of altaea and fenugrec and mellilote in water, and thus be soothed.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be warned on his back, and place underneath the seat a stick of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors at his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make the patient be present, a man who is bigger than the patient; and let him stand upright beside the seat of the patient, and put his shoulder underneath the seat of the patient, and lift the seat high up, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister treats the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick in the ground, so that the head should be just as steady as a pestle, and not too big or too slender.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then place it under the patient, but let there be soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing far from the stick; then extend their hand downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of two cubits and four fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the bone, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place it on the head of the stick with soft drapings, so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the bone of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick from afar, and join the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair of sufficient width, and extend your hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now be set.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary to put under the seat a layer of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powder of soft mill, with incense and album of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold under the seat strongly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand at its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary to massage little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more afterwards, five or six days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is weakened from its place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary to administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five days, and the joint cannot hold together, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is wounded or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and tardiness in movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the joint is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, because one sees well and feels well; and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the injured joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus, so that abscesses do not come to life, for if abscesses come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is behind; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms be stretched out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count around, above and below, and bend the joint at its fingers assembled, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and iron at the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold fast with two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror joins the joint to its hand, anoint it with no oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint forcefully, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, set a dry plaster with egg white, and hold the arm firmly, and bend the arm at the collar of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, restart the plaster and bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels grievous after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, soak it and rub it well, and press until it is alleviated; or you put on the joint a fatty woolen cloth, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the cloth back on, and then enter into a bath; and do it two or three times, until he is healthy; and if you see, set on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady; if it returns to its proper disposition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints However, it must be quickly returned to its place, at the same time that it is dislocated, so that the limb may not become swollen, or an abscess may not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reduction is that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers of the hand, and the doctor places them evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick part of his hand on a table at extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then hold the swelling down with a poultice, and let it settle so that it may recommence sensing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to cauterize according to the case, and by chance nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it be still for a while, then release it and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no stiffness, apply warm water compresses, and rub it so that it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Here is the translation:
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be still for a long time, and then make it even that day; and of the night, as we have said, and loosen it that day, and make it move, and relax it at night; and do this frequently, until it is straightened.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations are sudden and violent, cannot be held back, and often soften some member, or the two hips or the two arms or the two legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shinbone changes to three parts; that which changes at the back is called "gouty".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you should warn that the gouty disease came from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures proclaimed grand words, where there is no great profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instructions in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes before the pest, no one is healthy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those unless it is properly treated which comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in a straight line, and have a strap underneath him, so he does not slip;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then apply a firebrand to the head on the ground firmly, and another to the feet, and bind a linen thread around the affected areas of the patient, and another to the thighs, and to the knees, and to the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two ministers tie the linen threads, one to the head and the others to the feet, among the two firebrands.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well fastened, the firebrand thus as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover through this cure, take a table of three long arms, and place it under the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the head of the table under the patient, then put the middle of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put the mirrors on the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it thus in the tourniquet that turns on the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two tongs at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the other feet, and have between each tong, above and below, a space of one finger's width;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each tong a perforation, where the tourniquet runs, and let the tongs be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two tongs have one turning tong, on which the ligature turns, and have in two turnings two small tongs of one finger's width, to turn the tourniquet;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the ligature which is among the bundles to the tourniquet towards the head, and the other ligature towards the feet at the other tourniquet, and each of the ministers turns their tourniquet to all the ligatures, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then place a soothing plaster with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then an instillation from a tablet of two inches long, which grips the part of the spine and the healthy part of the vertebrae, then bind with a ligature, as we have said, and use the subtle skill of healing, so that it may be sound.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if something comes to the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the instillation that we mentioned before; and sometimes one administers in a piece of lead.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear of the spine behind the back, and one believes that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which reason one must not have any presumption: lest by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Here is the translation:
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocations is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the healthy one, and cannot bend his knee towards the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limbs that are weakened by hot abscesses, because the head of the hip comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one who reaches death, it is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who has reached beforehand, it is that they extend their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and inflames the ankle, and when it walks, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has it behind, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the hip beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no treatment; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of three kinds of dislocations, you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch inside and outside, and move to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one lien that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then he tightens with a soft thread on the thigh; and another one ties the top of the thread around the hip;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then you must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, then you should place the patient on their healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the limb that is beneath the angle, then stretch the thread up towards the angle, and towards the stronghold;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister by the arm, and embrace the large limb of the hip joint, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong and soft lien above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it be suspended from the top of a pole, and let it be one arm's length above the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister hang with the patient, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in its former shape, then adjust the patient, as we have said in the one who has had it reset, and tighten the lien properly on the injured leg, and on the foot also.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put the fire irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then place the fire iron between the hips of the patient in the form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet draplets around, so they do not blister the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal in his hand to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, you must extend the injured leg hastantly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror on the painful area of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the hips, it does not need to stretch the patient downward, nor lift off the ground, instead it needs to be just as if the joint was dislocated upwards, as we have said about lying on the .ij. joints;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it is on his face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put on the plaster, and restrain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for two or three days, then remove it, and put on the plaster above; and if you see that they are even, restrain them, as before, and leave it for two days; then remove it, and make it be well-conforted, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joints are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, forward, and backward; and they do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if he does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg as much as he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your hands, and pull it between your two, then bend the three bones of the knee forcefully; and another minister extends his foot, until the joint returns to its place, and the signs are that he adheres well his leg to his thigh lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And put the emplaster on, and make a straight line from the thigh to the hip joint, and bind it strongly for 3 or 4 days, then remove it; and do not disturb the patient's trouble further, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes sprained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the flesh is swollen, and it pulls ahead to the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reliefs are easier, and one must extend them easily with their hands when they are somewhat numb.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit upright, and tighten the bandages strongly by the leg, above the flesh;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left. Do this several times, then stretch it high, and push the foot well up high;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do it several times, as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it returns to its place, that's good; if not, start the treatment again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a pillow firmly on the ground between his hips, and wrap the blankets around, so that the patient does not slip.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then stretch the muscles of the hip, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that it lies on the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch each minister equally, and the pillow should be placed between the patient's hips to hold the patient in place when one stretches them.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the mirrors equal to the dislocation in his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, set the plaster and stitches above, and strain forcefully, and bind the foot to the leg, and wrap the nerves that are on the back of the knee, so the ligaments are not too stretched.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are swollen, strain; then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and delay sending the patient away for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, you must apply it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, if they need to be nicely stretched without effort, and it's a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or fingers, then you must make the patient sit on a flat plain or table straight, and put your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is equal, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the knee, then strain firmly, and let it be for two hours, then disjoin it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not harsh.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and begin with gentle things to calm the hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if you reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscesses dry up and come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, you should administer soothing things to calm the abscess, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccated remedies.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is dislocation with fracture, and you do not despair, if the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Explain the rule of cautery
